1
delighted relieved indifferent
①  ②  ③ 
worried frightened
④  ⑤ 10. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
to help his brother to fix the computer 
3. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  ①  ② 
to design the poster to put up the posters
③  ④ 
①  신학기 수강신청 요령 to mail out the invitations
⑤ 
②  기숙사 이용 수칙 변경
③  봄방학 캠프 신청 안내
④  도난 상황 발생 시 대응 수칙
⑤  봄방학 중 기숙사 도난 방지 방법
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 구입할 휴대전화를 
고르시오.
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.   
①  에어컨 켜기 ②  선풍기 가져오기 ①
③  에어컨 온도 낮추기 ④  선풍기 수리하기 ②
⑤  냉방 기준 변경 신청하기
③ 
④
5. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 차액으로 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점] ⑤
$5 $6 $7 $9 $10
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
Atlantic Cruise Tour
6. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  12. 다음을 듣고,  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 
고르시오. 않는  것을 고르시오.
①  먼지의 유해성을 경고하려고 ①  첫 방문지는 수영이나 스노클링을 할 수 있는 해변이다.
 11 Queens 
②  청소기가 고장 난 상태를 설명하려고 ②  오전 시에는  섬을 방문할 예정이다.
③  다양한 마루 바닥재를 소개하려고 ③  점심식사 이후에 돌고래 쇼가 예정되어 있다.
Coral 
④  최신 청소기 제품을 홍보하려고 ④  섬에서는 사진촬영을 할 수 없다.
8
⑤  이사 갈 아파트의 청소를 의뢰하려고 ⑤  버스는 오전  시 정각에 출발할 예정이다.
1
82
외국어(영어) 영역
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점] 18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
So, you’re ready to add a new member, a furry one, to 
your  family.  But  now  you  have  one  more  decision  to 
make: What kind of dog should I get? Here are some tips 
to  consider  when  choosing  a  dog  that  is  right  for  you. 
First, pick a dog that fits your home. Bring a big one into 
your  house  only  if  you  can  give  him  a  lot  of  space. 
Second, don’t buy a shaggy dog if you’re allergic. Getting 
a non-shedding dog is a good idea if you’re worried about 
loose  hairs  or  your  kids’  allergies.  Third,  pick  a 
mild-mannered  puppy  that  is  likely  to  be  more  forgiving 
and  protective  of  his  little  owners.  Keep  these  in  mind, 
and you’ll enjoy having the new member at home.
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
*shaggy: 털북숭이의
①  애완견 훈련 방법에 관해 안내하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ②  애완견 유기의 문제점에 관해 지적하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오. ③  애완견 위생 관리 요령에 관해 설명하려고
Woman:   ④  애완견을 기르는 어려움에 관해 알려주려고
                                                                                             
⑤  애완견 선택 시 고려사항에 관해 조언하려고
It’s totally none of your business.
① 
Today I’d like to hear about your childhood.
②  She[her]
19. 밑줄 친  가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
The book industry has also declined drastically.
③ 
Switching on the light in the nursery, Evelyn found her 
It’s a great honor to have you here in my office. 
④ 
baby daughter, Julie, tossing feverishly and giving out odd 
This is my first time visiting the Statue of Liberty.
⑤ 
little cries.  She put her hand against Julie’s cheeks. They 
①
were  burning.  With  an  exclamation,  she  followed  her 
②
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  baby’s arm down under the cover until she found her little 
적절한 것을 고르시오. hand. The whole thumb was swollen to the wrist and in the 
Man:   center  was  a  little  inflamed  sore. She  rushed  to  the 
                                                                                                    ③
phone. Doctor Foulke, the family physician, sounded upset at 
Thank you for buying my old furniture.
① 
being  called  out  of  bed  at  midnight.  She  ran  back  to  the 
I’ll post an ad on the website right away.
② 
nursery to check on her daughter. Taking a closer look, she 
Don’t forget to keep in touch after you move.
③ 
found  her thumb to be somewhat more swollen.  She 
I wish you luck in getting into the university. ④ ⑤
④ 
knelt beside the bed and began smoothing back Julie’s hair 
I’m really happy I can finally get a new fridge.
⑤  over and over.
16. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  (A) (B) (C)
20. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은?
Woman:  
                                                                                              You  have  to  pay  close  attention  to  someone’s  normal 
I think the newspaper is more interesting. pattern in order to notice a deviation from it when he or she 
① 
I know exactly what he’s going to order. lies. Sometimes the variation is as (A) subtle/subtly as a 
② 
Let’s cancel their reservation tomorrow. pause. Other times it is obvious and abrupt. I recently saw a 
③ 
I can’t wait to taste his dishes. news interview with an acquaintance (B) who/whom I was 
④ 
Let’s keep our fingers crossed. certain  was  going  to  lie  about  a  few  particularly  sensitive 
⑤ 
issues, and lie she did. During most of her interview she was 
Angelina Scott calm  and  direct,  but  when  she  started  lying,  her  manner 
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장 
changed  dramatically:  she  threw  her  head  back,  laughed  in 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
‘disbelief,’ and shook her head back and forth. It is true that 
Angelina:  
                                                                                           
the  questions  (C) dealt/dealing  with  very  personal  issues, 
It’s a good thing that you came early today.
①  but I have found that in general, no matter how touchy the 
②  You have to pay a fine for parking illegally.  question, if a person is telling the truth his or her manner 
③  You should answer the phone call immediately. will not change significantly or abruptly.
Don’t feel bad since you learned a good lesson.
④  (A) (B) (C)
I told you that you should buy a new cell phone.
⑤  subtle who dealt
① …… ……
subtle who dealing
② …… ……
subtle whom dealt
③  …… ……
  이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의  subtly who dealt
④ …… ……
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다. subtly whom dealing
⑤ …… ……
2
83
외국어(영어) 영역
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은? [24～28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Fieldwork is the hallmark of cultural anthropology. It is the  24. Science  is  making  the  future,  and  nations  are  busy 
way we explore and learn about the vast  detailed intricacy  making  future  scientists.  The  more  science  that  emerges 
①
of  human  culture  and  individual  behavior.  And  it  is,  from this investment, the greater the need for us to follow 
the  gist  of  the  science  with  sufficient  understanding.  In 
importantly, the way  in which most cultural anthropologists 
②
other  words,  if  we  the  ordinary  people  are  to  keep  pace 
earn and maintain their professional standing. Some of the 
with  science,  we  need  more  science  writers,  and  more 
early personal accounts of anthropologists in the field  make 
science  writing  that  is  clear,  wise  and  eloquent,  and  that 
fieldwork  sound exciting,  adventuresome,  certainly  exotic, 
③ demands  to  be  read.  People  often  feel  excluded  from 
sometimes  easy.  Malinowski,  the  classic  anthropological 
science,  convinced  that  it  takes  an  advanced  degree  to 
fieldworker, describes the early stages of fieldwork as ‘a strange, 
understand what scientists do. As a result, they defensively 
sometimes  unpleasant,  sometimes  intensely  interesting 
shrug off the whole business as an exclusive realm of little 
adventure which soon ④ adopts quite a natural course.’ He  relevance  to  their  lives.  One  of  the  surest  cures  for 
goes on to describe his daily routine of strolling through the  scientific is  great  scientific  literature, 
village  observed the intimate details of family life, and as  writing that does not merely translate technical terms into 
⑤
he tells it, such observations seem possible and accessible. plain English or explain complicated ideas simply. 
intolerance immorality illiteracy
①  ②  ③ 
irregularity manipulation
④  ⑤ 
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
Albert Einstein sought relentlessly for a so-called unified 
25.   . If I assign fifty students a 
field theory a theory capable of describing nature’s forces 
― five-page essay on the subject of why the Roman Empire 
within a single, all-encompassing, coherent framework. 
① fell, most of them are likely to say it was a combination 
Einstein was not motivated by the things we often associate  of  economic  and  social  causes  ultimately  leading  to  a 
with scientific undertakings, such as trying to explain this or  weakening  of  the  frontiers.  This  would  be  a  fine  answer, 
that piece of experimental data.  Instead, he was driven by  but  after  reading  forty-five  papers  all  saying  the  same 
②
a  passionate  belief  that  the  deepest  understanding  of  the  thing, I’m ready for a change. If you can take a different 
universe would reveal its truest wonder: the simplicity and  angle  from  the  rest  of  the  class  in  a  paper,  you’re  more 
power  of  the  principles  on  which  it  is  based.  As  in  likely  to  impress  your  professors.  But  here’s  the  tricky 
③
Einstein’s  formulation,  the  two  theories  underlying  the  part being  different  is  risky,  and  it  only  works  if  you 
―
tremendous progress of physics were mutually incompatible. back up your argument very well. If you choose to argue 
Einstein  wanted  to  illuminate  the  workings  of  the  that  Rome  fell  solely  because  Christianity  weakened  the 
④
universe with a clarity never before achieved, allowing us  fighting  spirit  of  the  Romans,  you  will  need  persuasive 
reasoning and arguments against any potential objections.
all to stand in awe of its sheer beauty and elegance. In 
⑤
his day, however, Einstein never realized this dream, mainly  Variety is the spice of life
① 
because  a  number  of  essential  features  of  matter  and  the  The essence of writing is in its brevity
② 
forces  of  nature  were  either  unknown  or,  at  best,  poorly  Don’t fix what is not broken
③ 
understood. The pen is mightier than the sword
④ 
Rome was not built in a day
⑤ 
23. 다음 글에서 지도자에 관하여 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 
26. Consumers of different age groups obviously have very 
적절한 것은?
different needs and wants. Although people who belong to 
Effective leaders set the tone for the entire organization. 
the same age group differ in many other ways, they do tend 
It’s not a matter of knowing more than everyone else. There 
to share a set of values and common cultural experiences 
are plenty of leaders who are not the biggest experts in their 
that  they  carry  throughout  life.  In  some  cases,  marketers 
companies. But it does mean working hard, something anyone 
initially develop a product to attract one age group and then 
can do. Be the first person to arrive at the workplace and be 
try to  . That is what the 
the last one to leave. If you can do that, you will already be 
high-octane  energy  drink  Reddox  does.  The  company 
light years ahead of most managers in the respect you will  aggressively introduced it in bars, nightclubs, and gyms to 
gain from your team members. Apply the same principle to all  the product’s core audience of young people. Over time, it 
your routine activities. If you expect your sales force to make  became popular in other contexts, and the company began 
50 calls each day, make 100 calls yourself. It is not rocket  to sponsor the PGA European Tour to expand its reach to 
science. It is just  basic  ‘lead  by  example’  management.  No  older golfers. It also hands out free cans to commuters, cab 
one can really discredit leaders who are the hardest-working  drivers, and car rental agencies to promote the drink as a 
individuals in their organizations. way to stay alert on the road. 
[3점]
raise its retail price
①  부서별 경쟁을 활성화하라. ① 
broaden its appeal later on
②  열심히 일하고 솔선수범하라. ② 
upgrade it for other age groups
③  전문성과 유연성을 겸비하라. ③ 
increase demand by limiting supply
④  중간 관리자의 역할을 존중하라. ④ 
create a positive image via the mass media
⑤  친화력으로 직장 내 화합을 도모하라. ⑤ 
3
84
외국어(영어) 영역
27. is  aggravated  by  the  [29～30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 
overabundance  of  information  at  our  disposal.  While  this  것을 고르시오.
is  obvious  enough  in  some  realms for  example, 
― 29. Like an artist who pursues both enduring excellence and 
consider  how  much  information is  potentially  relevant  for  shocking  creativity,  great  companies  foster  a  (A)    
estimating  the  value  of  Microsoft  stock even  when  the  between  continuity  and  change.  On  the  one  hand,  they 
―
information set seems less cluttered, information overload,  adhere  to  the  principles  that  produced  success  in  the  first 
place,  yet  on  the  other  hand,  they  continually  evolve, 
a  state  of  confusion  and  decision  avoidance,  can  still 
modifying  their  approach  with  creative  improvements  and 
occur.  In  one  experiment,  shoppers  in  a  supermarket 
intelligent adaptation. But the point here is not as simple as 
were  presented  with  free  samples  of  jams  and  jellies.  In 
“some  companies  failed  because  they  did  not  change.” 
the  first  treatment,  a  small  selection  was  available  for 
Companies that change constantly but without any consistent 
tasting;  in  the  second,  a  large  selection  was  available.  rationale will  (B)   just as surely as those that change 
While  everyone  likes  the  idea  of  abundant  choice,  and  not  at  all.  There  is  nothing  inherently  wrong  with 
indeed the table with the greater  selection  attracted  larger  adhering to specific practices and strategies. But you should 
comprehend the underlying why behind those practices, and 
crowds,  it  was  the  table  with  fewer  samples  that  led  to 
thereby see when to keep them and when to change them.
the  most  sales.  The  likely  reason  is  that  the  large 
selection  led  to  information  overload,  the  feeling  that  the  (A) (B)
tension collapse
decision was too complicated for immediate action. ① ……
tension prosper
② ……
Difficulty in assessing information
① balance flourish
③ ……
② The shortage of trustworthy informants ④ divergence …… succeed
Mental fatigue caused by misleading information divergence perish
③ ⑤ ……
Indeterminacy arising from indirect information
④
The complexity of altering consumer behavior
⑤ 30. Since most of you are working on a word processor, it 
seems  silly  to  spend  too  much  time  on  spelling.  Your 
word-processing  program  will  spell  check  items  for  you.
(A) , spelling is not a completely lost art. There 
are words that are not in the spell checker’s dictionary. 
Also,  your  spell  checker  will  not  help  you  if  you 
misspell a word and mistakenly turn it into another word. 
28. The  essence  of  science  is  to  uncover  patterns  and  (B) , when  you  write  ‘lightening’  instead  of 
regularities  in  nature  by  finding  algorithmic  compressions  ‘lightning,’ the program will not recognize the error. So, get 
of  observations.  But  the  raw  data  of  observation  rarely  in the habit of rereading your work and looking up words 
that  the  spell  checker  does  not  pick  up.  You  need  to 
exhibit  explicit  regularities.  Instead  we  find  that  nature’s 
develop  the  skill  of  knowing  when  words  look  wrong. 
order  is  hidden  from  us,  it  is  written  in  code.  To  make 
Never hand something in until you have checked it.
progress in science we need to crack the cosmic code, to 
(A) (B)
dig beneath the raw data and uncover the hidden order. I 
However For example
often  liken  fundamental  science  to  doing  a  crossword  ① ……
However Therefore
puzzle.  Experiment  and  observation  provide  us  with  ② ……
That is Similarly
③  ……
clues,  but  the  clues  are  cryptic,  and  require  some 
In addition For example
④ ……
considerable  ingenuity  to  solve.  With  each  new  solution, 
In addition Therefore
⑤ ……
. As  with  a  crossword,  so 
with  the  physical  universe,  we  find  that  the  solutions  to 
‘I’
31. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
independent  clues  link  together  in  a  consistent  and 
supportive  way  to  form  a  coherent  unity,  so  that  the  It was the day of the audition. I hadn’t slept a wink the 
previous night. Strangely, I wasn’t tired. It could have been the 
more  clues  we  solve,  the  easier  we  find  it  to  fill  in  the 
adrenaline  pumping  through  my  veins,  or  maybe  it  was  the 
missing features.
[3점]  five cups of coffee I drank that morning. Either way, I couldn’t 
*cryptic: 비밀스러운 sit  still.  I  kept  getting  up  and  down  from  my  chair,  pacing 
around  the  room.  A  dozen  thoughts  went  through  my  head. 
the depth of scientific experiments keeps us in awe
① Would I remember my lines? Would I be able to display the 
we glimpse a bit more of the overall pattern of nature
② right emotions? I kept telling myself to relax but the butterflies 
③ the code-breaking process becomes increasingly mysterious in my stomach had an intention of their own. When my name 
the  regularity  of  nature  is  revealed  in  its  entirety  to  was called, I slowly stepped in front of the judges. Their gaze 
④
the observer fell heavy upon me. My mind drew a complete blank.
we  crack  the  cosmic  codes  one  by  one,  replacing  an  jealous satisfied sympathetic
⑤ ①  ②  ③ 
old solution with the new one angry nervous
④  ⑤ 
4
85
외국어(영어) 영역
(A) (B) (C) ways of cultivating ecosystem engineers
32. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  ① 
altering the ecosystem along the U.S. coasts
적절한 것은? ②
From the twelve million articles on Wikipedia to the  ③  species playing a major role in the ecosystem
millions  of  free  secondhand  goods  offered  on  websites,  causes of population reduction in some species
④ 
we are discovering that money is not the only motivator.  necessity of protecting endangered species in wetlands
⑤ 
(A) Altruism/Selfishness has  always  existed,  but  the  Web 
gives it a platform where the actions of individuals can have  35. Despite the fact that ancient civilizations relied upon the 
global  impact.  In  a  sense,  zero-cost  distribution  has  turned  apparent  motion  of  celestial  bodies  through  the  sky  to 
sharing  into  an  industry.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  determine seasons, months, and years, we know little about 
monetary  economy  it  all  looks  free indeed,  it  looks  like  the details of timekeeping in prehistoric eras. But wherever 
―
unfair competition but that says more about our shortsighted  we turn up records and artifacts, we usually discover that in 
―
ways of measuring value than it does about the worth of what  every culture, some people were preoccupied with measuring 
is created. The incentives to (B) share/dominate can range  the passage of time. Ice-age hunters in Europe over 20,000 
from reputation and attention to less measurable factors such  years  ago  scratched  lines  and  made  holes  in  sticks  and 
as  expression,  fun,  satisfaction,  and  simply  self-interest.  bones,  possibly  counting  the  days  between  phases  of  the 
moon.  Five  thousand  years  ago,  Sumerians  in  the 
Sometimes the giving is (C) conscious/unintentional . You 
Tigris-Euphrates valley had a calendar that divided the year 
give information to Google when you have a public website, 
into 30 day months, and the day into 12 periods. We have 
whether you intend to or not, and you give aluminum cans 
no written records of Stonehenge, built over 4,000 years ago 
to the homeless guy who collects them from the recycling 
in England, but its alignments show its purposes apparently 
bin, even if that is not what you meant to do.
included the determination of seasonal or celestial events.
(A) (B) (C)
Altruism share conscious *celestial: 천체의
①  …… ……
contrast in timekeeping between ancient and modern society
Altruism share unintentional ①
② …… ……
significance of making a calendar in human history
Altruism dominate conscious ②
③ …… ……
astronomy and the western religious rituals
Selfishness share conscious ③
④ …… ……
measuring time in ancient civilizations
Selfishness dominate unintentional ④
⑤ …… ……
observing stars in prehistoric eras
⑤
33. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  문장은?
않은  것은?
Life is full of hazards. Disease, enemies and starvation are 
always  menacing  primitive  man.  Experience  teaches  him 
that medicinal herbs, valor, the most strenuous labor, often 
come  to  naught,  yet  normally  he  wants  to  survive  and 
①
enjoy the good things of existence. Faced with this problem, 
he takes to any method that seems  adapted to his ends. 
②
Often  his  ways  appear  incredibly crude  to  us  moderns 
③
until we remember how our next-door neighbor acts in like 
emergencies. When medical science pronounces him  curable, 
④
he  will  not  resign  himself  to  fate  but  runs  to  the  nearest 
quack  who  holds  out  hope  of  recovery.  His  urge  for 
self-preservation will not down, nor will that of the illiterate 
peoples of the world, and in that overpowering will to live is 
anchored the belief in supernaturalism, which is absolutely 
universal among known peoples, past and present.
⑤
*quack: 돌팔이 의사
The  above  graph  shows  the  number  of  professionals  per 
1,000  high  school  participants  and  the  median  lifetime 
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
earnings for the given six sports in the United States in 2008. 
34. Some species seem to have a stronger influence than others  Basketball had the highest median lifetime earnings and 
①
on their ecosystem. Take away the sea stars along the northwest 
hockey  had  the  highest  number  of  professionals  per  1,000 
coast  of  the  United  States,  for  instance,  and  the  ecosystem 
high  school  participants.  Soccer  had  the  lowest  median 
②
changes dramatically; in the absence of these sea stars, their 
lifetime earnings and the lowest number of professionals per 
favorite prey, mussels, takes over and makes it hard for other 
1,000 high school participants.  Golf and baseball, ranked 
species  that  used  to  live  there.  Sea  stars  are  known  as  ③
second and third in median lifetime earnings respectively, both 
keystone  species,  because  as  top  predators  they  determine 
had median lifetime earnings above 6 million dollars.  The 
ecosystem structure by their eating habits. If you chop down  ④
only two sports that had median lifetime earnings less than 
an aspen tree by a beaver pond, not much will happen; but if 
4  million  dollars  were  football  and  soccer.  Except  for 
you take away a beaver, a wetland might dry out, changing  ⑤
the kinds of plants that live there and the animals that rely on  hockey, which had more than 4 professionals per 1,000 high 
them.  Because  beavers  exert  their  influence  by  physically  school participants, the remaining five sports all had less than 
altering the landscape, they are known as ecosystem engineers. 1.5 professionals per 1,000 high school participants.
5
86
외국어(영어) 영역
Sveta Bogoroditsa open  to  new  experiences  and  opportunities.  Meanwhile, 
37. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
unlucky people tend to be tenser and too focused on certain 
The  church  ‘Sveta  Bogoroditsa’  (‘Holy  Virgin’)  in 
tasks,  which  stops  them  from  noticing  opportunities  they 
Karlovo  has  a  handsome  profile  with  its  blue  and  white 
aren’t explicitly looking for. So, next time you’re heading 
bell tower. The bell tower is relatively new, from 1897, but 
to a party, don’t go in with a goal in mind (no matter how 
the  church  building,  as  the  inscription  above  the  western 
much you want to attract someone). Instead, take things as 
entrance  tells  us,  dates  from  1851.  Before  they  began 
they  come  and  you  never  know  what  might  happen.  You 
constructing this new building in 1847, the older church of 
could even make some awesome new friends.
the  Holy  Virgin  had  burned  down  in  1813.  This  latter 
church, about which little is known, is believed by some to 
①  열린 사고와 행동은 행운을 불러온다.
have been built already at the end of the fifteenth century, 
②  열정과 몰입은 행운을 부르는 지름길이다.
at the time of the founding of the little town of Karli-ova, 
③  행동하기 전에 생각하는 습관이 필요하다.
later Karlovo. In any case, the names of priests serving in 
④  운명에 도전하면 좋은 기회가 오기 마련이다.
the church have been preserved from the eighteenth century 
⑤  새로운 친구들을 사귀다 보면 이상형을 만나기 쉽다.
on. Although the construction was completed in 1851, the 
events of the Crimean War and lack of funds delayed the 
40. In  a  study  conducted  by  Karen  O’Quinn  and  Joel 
furnishing of the church, and its consecration did not take 
Aronoff, participants were asked to negotiate with a seller 
place until May 20, 1858.
over the purchase price of a piece of art. Toward the end 
*consecration: 헌당(식) of the negotiation, the seller made a final offer in one of 
①  윤곽선이 아름다우며 흑색 종탑을 가지고 있다.  two ways. Half of the time he said that he would accept 
$6,000, while the other half of the time he gave the same 
②  교회 건물보다 먼저 세워진 종탑이 있다.   
Karli-ova final price but also added a little humor (“Well, my final 
③    마을이 세워질 무렵 화재로 타 버렸다.
18 offer is $6,000, and I’ll throw in my pet frog”). Those few 
④  봉직한 사제들의 이름이  세기부터 보존되어 있다.
1851 moments  of  attempted  humor  had  a  large  effect,  as 
⑤  년 건물 완공과 동시에 모든 비품을 갖추었다.
participants  made  a  much  greater  compromise  in  their 
purchase price when they heard about the frog. It seemed 
Edwin Armstrong
38. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
that  the  brief  humorous  comment  momentarily  put  the 
Edwin Armstrong, who first discovered and developed FM 
participants  in  a  good  mood  and  encouraged  them  to  be 
radio in the 1920s and early 1930s, is often considered the 
more giving.
most  prolific  and  influential  inventor  in  radio  history.  He 
alone understood the impact of De Forest’s vacuum tube, and  ①  상대를 존중하면 가격 협상이 쉽게 이루어진다.
he used it to invent an amplifying system that enabled radio  ②  예상 구매자의 성향파악이 중요하다.
receivers to pick up distant signals. Armstrong’s innovations  ③  거래의 성사를 위해 적절한 가격 제시가 필요하다.
rendered useless the enormous alternators used for generating  ④  유머를 사용하면 협상을 유리하게 이끌 수 있다.
power in early radio transmitters. In 1922, he sold a ‘super’  ⑤  신중한 협상 자세는 이익을 극대화시킨다.
version of his circuit to Radio Corporation of America (RCA) 
for  $200,000  and  sixty  thousand  shares  of  RCA  stock,  [41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
making  him  a  millionaire  as  well  as  RCA’s  largest  private  41. The green revolution was a mixed blessing. Over time 
stockholder. Armstrong also worked on the major problem of 
farmers came to rely heavily on broadly adapted, high-yield 
radio  reception―electrical  interference.  Between  1930  and  crops  to  the  exclusion  of  varieties  adapted  to  local 
1933, the inventor filed five patents on FM. conditions.  Monocropping  vast  fields  with  the  same 
*alternator: 교류발전기 genetically  uniform  seeds  helps  boost  yield  and  meet 
immediate  hunger  needs.  Yet  high-yield  varieties  are  also 
①  라디오 역사상 가장 영향력 있는 발명가로 여겨지곤 한다.
genetically  weaker  crops  that  require  expensive  chemical 
② 전파 수신기로 하여금 원거리 신호를 잡게 해주는 증폭 장치를 
fertilizers  and  toxic  pesticides.  The  same  holds  true  for 
발명했다.
high-yield livestock breeds, which often require expensive 
③ 그의 혁신적 장치들로 인하여 초기 전파 송신기에 사용되던  feed and medicinal care to survive in foreign climates. The 
거대한 교류발전기가 필요 없어졌다. drive to increase production is pushing out local varieties, 
1922 RCA
④ 년에 자신의 고성능 회로를  에 기증했다. diluting  livestock’s  genetic  diversity  in  the  process.  As  a 
1930 1933 FM 5
⑤ 년부터  년 사이에,  에 관한  개의 특허를 출원했다. result,  the  world’s  food  supply  has  become  largely 
dependent  on  a  shrinking  list  of  breeds  designed  for 
maximum  yield.  In  short,  in  our  focus  on  increasing  the 
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. amount of food we produce today, we have accidentally put 
39. Despite what you might think, luck isn’t a matter of fate  ourselves at risk for food shortages in the future.
or  destiny,  according  to  research  by  psychologist  Richard 
Pros and Cons of Using Chemical Fertilizers
① 
Wiseman.  Instead,  it’s  a  result  of  the  way  lucky  people 
Is Genetic Diversity a Blessing in Disguise?
② 
think and act―which means that anyone can learn to be  ③  Who Will Conquer Famine, Farmers or Scientists?
lucky!  For  instance,  Wiseman  found  that  lucky  people  Livestock Diseases: A Never-ending Struggle
④ 
always take notice of what’s going on around them and stay  Farming Uniform Breeds: A Double-edged Sword
⑤ 
6
87
외국어(영어) 영역
42. About  twenty  years  ago,  Time  magazine  described  a  44. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
study by a psychologist of people who had lost their jobs 
The  smartest  of  our  deep  ancestors  would  have  stored 
three times due to plant closings. The writers were amazed 
their  excess  meat  in  the  bodies  and  minds  of  others 
by what they discovered. They expected the people being 
(not just their own kin).
laid  off  to  be  beaten  down  and  discouraged.  Instead  they 
 Evolutionary  psychologists  have  suggested  that  the 
found them to be incredibly resilient. Why was that? They 
absence  of  any  effective  form  of  refrigeration  was  critical 
concluded  that  people  who  had  weathered  repeated 
to  our  early  moral  development.  Let’s  say  that  you’re  an 
adversity had learned to bounce back. People who had lost 
early  humanoid  hunting  and  gathering  on  the  African 
a job and found a new one twice before were much better 
savannah  and  you  strike  it  lucky. ( ) You  come 
①
prepared  to  deal  with  adversity  than  someone  who  had 
across  a  huge  beast  and  you  manage  to  kill  it. ( ) It 
②
always  worked  at  the  same  place  and  had  never  faced 
yields far more meat than anyone involved in the hunt or 
adversity. It may sound ironic, but if you have experienced 
their  families  can  possibly  consume.  ( ) How  do  you 
③
a  lot  of  failure,  you  are  actually  in  a  better  position  to  get the most benefit of your excess meat without a fridge, 
achieve success than people who have not. or  anywhere  to  store  it?  ( ) Provided  those  benefiting 
④
from your gift could possibly repay your generosity in the 
Setbacks: Not All Bad
① 
future,  that  was  the  best  thing  you  could  do  with  excess 
A Shortcut Toward Happiness
② 
meat.  ( ) Groups  of  early  humans  who  developed 
Job Satisfaction vs. Job Security ⑤
③ 
stable  relationships  and  practiced  this  sort  of  mutual 
Searching for the Causes of Human Despair
④  altruism were in a better position to prosper and multiply.
Adversity and Failure: An Unhealthy Combination
⑤ 
(A)
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
A  bumper  sticker  reading  “Don’t  Believe  Everything 
You Think” is placed on the edge of the whiteboard in 
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? Greene’s office. It represents the underlying message of 
the  book  he  is  writing.  An  analogy  carried  throughout 
One  reason  why  the  definitions  of  words  have 
the  book  compares  the  moral  brain  to  a  camera  with 
changed  over  time  is  simply  because  of  their  misuse. 
automatic settings for taking a picture of a mountain or 
There  are  a  growing  number  of  examples  where  the 
an indoor portrait or a close-up of a flower, and manual 
incorrect  meaning  of  relatively  commonplace  language 
settings  for  unusual  conditions  or  when  we  want  a 
has become more widespread than the original intention  nonstandard artistic effect. Greene believes emotions and 
or definition.    intuitions  are  the  auto  settings  for  our  morality  while 
reasoning is the manual mode.
(A) Now, imagine that an angry customer sent you a letter 
We need our intuitions to make the millions of quick 
about the service he received in one of your stores. If 
judgments that fill our lives from day to day or else we 
your reply is that you ‘perused his letter,’ he is likely  could not function. But they are not always trustworthy 
to get even more angry than he was before. moral indicators, since they were set to handle problems 
deep in our evolutionary past and are often useless for 
(B) The word ‘peruse’ is one of them. Most people think 
the newer complexities of the modern world. We need to 
that  to  ‘peruse’  something  means  to  ‘scan  or  skim  it 
rely on our manual settings, the reasoning sections of our 
quickly, without paying much attention.’ In fact, this is 
brain, for more complex or novel situations, Greene says.
the  exact  opposite  of  what  ‘peruse’  really  means:  ‘to  ??
study or read something carefully, in detail.’
(C) But  the  word  has  been  misused  so  often  by  so  many  According  to  Greene’s  view  on  the  moral  brain, 
emotions and intuitions make our lives easier in making
people,  that  this  second  sense  of  it the  exact 
―
(A) decisions, but we need to rely on (B)  
opposite  of  what  it  actually  means has  finally  been 
―
for more complex problems.
accepted as a secondary definition and as far as most 
people know, it is the only definition. 
(A) (B)
①  (A)-(C)-(B) ②  (B)-(A)-(C)  ① unusual …… conscience
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  - - ④  - -   everyday reasoning
② ……
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  - - difficult logic
③  ……
moral creativity
④ ……
habitual imagination
⑤ ……
7
88
외국어(영어) 영역
‘I’
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 48. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
(A)
① 북 캘리포니아에서 꾸준히 책을 읽으면서 자랐다.
Billups
② 에서  전에 생각했던 것보다 세상이 더 크다는 것을 
I  grew  up  in  a  small  town  in  northern  California, 
깨달았다.
between wide-open ranchland and dark forests, feeling at 
③ 대학 입학 후 사라져가는 꿈과 새로운 꿈에 관해 글을 쓰기 
home  in  two  places:  the  wild  land  and  books.  I  read 
시작했다.
constantly,  hungrily,  and  without  direction,  collecting  a 
Billups
④ 가 제공하는 장학금을 받고 그곳의 여름 방학 프로그램에 
strange  stew  of  facts  and  ideas  about  the  rest  of  the 
참가했다. 
world.  I  longed  for  a  world  away  from  what  I  knew 
⑤ 사진 수업에서 다른 학생들보다 자신의 재능이 더 뛰어나다고 
and outrageously outside my means.
생각했다.
(B)
[49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The important lesson I learned at (a)Billups the world 
―
was a lot bigger than I had imagined it to be was a little  The  McDonald’s  restaurants  that  are  located  across  the 
―
painful.  It  meant  I  was  a  lot smaller  than  I’d  realized.  I  United  States―and,  increasingly,  the  world―have  a 
significance that goes far beyond the convenience of quick 
went on to attend a state university and I began to write 
hamburgers, milk shakes, and salads. As sociologist George 
about  my  disappearing  dreams  and  new  dreams,  about 
Ritzer says, our everyday lives are being ‘McDonaldized.’
wishing and disappointment and feeling small. One day a 
The  McDonaldization  of  society  does  not  refer  just  to 
professor  (b)there  took  hold  of  me  and  said,  “You’re  a 
the  robotlike  assembly  of  food.  This  term  refers  to  the 
writer.” Until then, I hadn’t really known. I had to figure 
standardization of everyday life, a process that is transforming 
out who I was not going to be before I could get on to 
our lives. Want to do some shopping? Shopping malls offer 
who I was. The lesson from Billups lay below the surface, 
one-stop shopping in controlled environments. Planning a 
but when I began to write, it rose like flowers and bloomed 
trip?  Travel  agencies  offer  ‘package’  tours.  They  will 
into words and stories and books, and me.
transport middle-class Americans to ten European capitals 
(C) in fourteen days. All visitors experience the same hotels, 
restaurants, and other scheduled sites.
One  morning  I  came  across  a  catalog  for  a  college  Efficiency  brings  dependability.  You  can  expect  your 
preparatory  school  called  Billups  Academy.  (c)It  had  a  burger and fries to taste the same whether you buy them 
summer  program  and  offered  scholarships  for  high  in Los Angeles or Beijing. Although efficiency also lowers 
school  students  to  ‘deepen  and  extend  their  intellectual,  prices, it does come at a cost. Predictability washes away 
aesthetic,  and  moral  interests.’  I  applied  for  and  won  a  spontaneity, changing the quality of our lives. It produces 
scholarship.  Billups  wasn’t  just  another  school it  was  a  sameness,  a  bland  version  of  what  used  to  be  unique 
―
another  world.  I  was  used  to  big  skies,  wild  water,  experiences. In my own travels, for example, had I taken 
snakes  and  horses,  and  solitude.  What  waited  for  me  in  packaged  tours  I  never  would  have  had  the  eye-opening 
(d)this  new  world  was  tree-lined  avenues,  brick  experiences that have added so much to my appreciation of 
buildings with white pillars, and a wood-paneled library. human  diversity.  For  good  or  bad,  our  lives  are  being 
McDonaldized, and the predictability of packaged settings 
(D) seems  to  be  our  social  destiny.  Our  coming  prepackaged 
society will be  , of course. But it also means 
Unlike  back  at  home,  in  (e)the  new  school,  I  was  no 
that we will be trapped in the ‘iron cage’ of bureaucracy
longer the smartest kid in the classroom. I wasn’t the most 
just as Weber warned would happen.    
―
talented, or the least. Before going to Billups, one of my 
dreams was to become a photographer. That dream came to 
an  abrupt  halt  in  a  photography  class.  There  was  no  49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
denying in the other students’ pictures that they were far  Development of the Tourism Industry
① 
more talented than I was. I became severely depressed as  McDonaldization: A Societal Trend
② 
one dream after another faded from me. Then, on the last  Packaged Tours: Advantages and Disadvantages
③ 
night of the summer program, it hit me. I had been blind  Efficiency of Franchised Restaurants
④ 
to a lesson that was staring at me in the face. How to Increase Predictability of Society
⑤ 
46. 위 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장  50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
unique diverse efficient
적절한 것은? ①  ②  ③ 
spontaneous unpredictable
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D) ④  ⑤ 
① - - ② - -
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③ - - ④ - -
(D) (C) (B)
⑤ - -
*  확인 사항
(a) (e)
47. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 의미하는 바가 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? ?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤  하시오.
8
81
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
5. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터  22번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 
①  제철 과일 소비를 권장하려고
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다.
②  과일 보관 용기를 광고하려고
③  얼룩 제거 용품을 홍보하려고
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ④  과일 껍질 활용법을 소개하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오.  ⑤  과일 껍질의 영양소를 설명하려고
That’s my brother David.
① 
She likes taking pictures. 6. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
② 
He’s playing in the yard. 고르시오.
③ 
④  He had a happy childhood. ①  심포니의 유래와 역사
⑤  There are four in my family. ②  Mozart  음악의 독창성
Mozart
③  의 삶에 대한 재조명
④  고전 음악과 현대 음악의 차이점
Mozart
⑤    음악이 정서에 미치는 효과
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 7. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
Really? I’m proud of you. 고르시오.
① 
Okay. You can come with me.
②  ①  양초를 만드는 절차 ②  등산 시 유의할 사항
③  No. I’ll be fine with some rest. ③  적절한 휴식의 필요성 ④  취미 생활을 하는 이유
Oh, no! I’ll get you some water. ⑤  스트레스의 다양한 요인
④ 
Sure. What time should I do that?
⑤ 
8. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  아이와 함께 텃밭을 가꾸면 아이가 채소를 잘 먹게 된다.
②  텃밭에서 채소를 직접 기르면 가족 경제에 도움이 된다.
3. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ③  가족의 건강을 위해 유기농 채소를 구입할 필요가 있다. 
적절한 것을 고르시오. ④  지역 농산물을 구입하면 경제 활성화에 기여할 수 있다.
No, I don’t have a computer. ⑤  채소 위주의 식습관은 아이의 두뇌 발달을 촉진한다.
① 
Right, I’ll call you when I’m done.
② 
Yeah, I saved it in my cell phone. 9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
③ 
Yes, I’ll buy you a new cell phone.
④  ①  상담 교사－학생 ②  여행사 직원－여행객
Sorry, you’ve got the wrong number.
⑤  ③  수의사－애완동물 주인 ④  동물원 사육사－관람객
⑤  국립공원 직원－탐방객
10. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
4. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 여자의 집의 위치를 고르시오. 고르시오.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
영어 영역(A 형)
11. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을  18. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
고르시오. 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
Man:
①  마중 나가기 ②  쿠키 사다 주기
③  도시락 주문하기 ④  교통사고 신고하기
You must have enjoyed the party a lot.
① 
⑤  사무실에 데려다 주기
It’s nice of you to take care of my baby.
② 
I’m so excited that your baby can walk now.
③ 
I can’t wait to see what your baby will choose.
12. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을  ④ 
Thank you for inviting me to your graduation party.
고르시오.  ⑤ 
①  책 고르기 ②  우산 고쳐 주기
③  날씨 확인하기 ④  우편엽서 사 오기
19. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
⑤  항공편 예약하기
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 언급한 도서관 이용의 문제점을 고르시오. You should fill out the form first.
① 
But practice will make you better.
①  주차장 공사 소음 ②  어두운 조명 시설 ② 
Right, standing is good for your back.
③  부족한 편의 시설 ④  좁은 열람실 공간 ③ 
⑤  느린 인터넷 속도 ④  I’m sorry, but I can’t go to the concert.
Okay, I’ll try to get two front-row seats.
⑤ 
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 배낭여행을 갈 수 없는  이유를 고르시오. 
Julia Samuel
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장 
①  할아버지 댁에서 지내야 해서
적절한 것을 고르시오.
②  친구와 만날 약속이 있어서
③  부모님이 허락하지 않아서 Julia: Samuel, 
④  방학 숙제를 해야 해서
could you give me a ride home?
① 
⑤  제주도에 가야 해서
would you teach me how to park?
② 
when did you get your driver’s license?
③ 
what happened after you parked your car?
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점] ④ 
how many times did you take the road test?
$25 $30 $35 $40 $45 ⑤ 
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
16. 장학금에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고,  일치하지  않는  것을 
고르시오.  [3점]
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
①  선정 과정은 두 단계로 구성된다.
②  면접관은 학생들이 추천한 교사들이다. 21. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
$1,000
③  개인별로 학기당  가 지급된다.
①  강사 채용을 공고하려고
④  신청 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
②  개정된 학교 규칙을 설명하려고
3
⑤  명의 수혜자는 다음 달에 발표될 것이다.
③  개설 교과목 내용을 소개하려고
④  학교 행사 일정 변경을 공지하려고
⑤  학습 도우미 프로그램을 홍보하려고
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  여자가 선택한 복사기 모델을 
고르시오.
22. 과목으로 언급되지 않은  것은?
①  역사 ②  생물 ③  지리 ④  수학 ⑤  화학
①
②
③
④   이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의 
⑤ 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
영어 영역(A 형)
23. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
What do you think can make you a good tennis player? 
Suppose there are two different tennis pros giving you tennis 
lessons. The first pro says things like “good shot” and “good 
Dear Mayor Johnson:
swing” all the time to encourage you. The second one says 
“good  swing”  only  when  you  make  a  good  swing.  If  just 
I’m a long-time resident of Pinewood, and I’m really 
hearing “good swing” gives you a reward, then you will prefer 
concerned about the traffic problem in my neighborhood. 
the first instructor. But if what you want is to get better at 
The traffic has been increasing for the past three years, 
tennis, you will prefer the second instructor. That’s because 
and I’ve seen many near-accidents. I feel the intersection 
the  second  instructor’s  feedback  to  you  is  much  more 
at Burton Road and 3rd Street is very dangerous because 
informative than the first one’s. You’re not after “good swing” 
there aren’t any traffic lights. The city should consider 
rewards; you’re after a better tennis game. So feedback that 
installing traffic lights as soon as possible. I believe 
simply makes you feel great will not help you develop tennis 
that  this  issue  affects  the  safety  of  every  driver  or 
skills in the long run.
pedestrian  who  uses  that  intersection,  so  it  deserves 
immediate  attention.  Nothing  is  as  important  as  our 
① 프로와 아마추어 선수 간의 기술적 차이점
citizens’ safety, so fixing this issue should be made a top 
② 테니스 실력 향상을 위한 효과적인 피드백
priority.
③ 테니스가 정신 건강에 미치는 효과
I would appreciate your sincere consideration. ④ 운동 시설과 경기력의 관련성
⑤ 테니스의 올바른 스윙 자세
Best regards,
Laura McPherson
① 교통사고 후유증의 심각성을 알리려고
② 교차로에 신호등 설치를 요청하려고
③ 교통 법규 위반 차량을 신고하려고
④ 무단 횡단의 위험성을 강조하려고
⑤ 자동차 보험 가입을 권유하려고
26. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
In much of Europe, many businesses close during the month 
Everyone  would  like  to  assume  that  their  wonderful, 
of  August  when  people  go  on  vacation.  Most  Europeans 
creative ideas will sell themselves. But as Galileo, Edvard 
believe this is time that they should spend with family or 
Munch, Toni Morrison, Sylvia Plath, and millions of others 
engaging  in  personal  activities.  The  French,  in  particular, 
have discovered, they do not. On the contrary, creative ideas 
value their vacation time and prefer not to work overtime. 
are usually viewed with suspicion and distrust. Thus, students 
They enjoy the longest vacations of any country in the world; 
need to learn how to persuade other people of the value of 
French law states that employees must receive a minimum of 
their  ideas.  This  selling  is  part  of  the  practical  aspect  of 
five weeks of vacation a year. German companies appear to be 
creative thinking. If students do a science project, it is a good 
moving in this direction as well. Despite the extended free 
idea for them to present it and demonstrate why it makes an 
time, people of both France and Germany are very productive 
important contribution. If they develop a plan for a new form 
when they work. To Europeans, their vacation time seems 
of government, they should explain why it is better than the 
valuable.
existing form of government.
No Work, No Vacation!
①
① 공정한 판단은 타인의 의견을 경청하는 데서 시작된다.
Keys to Keeping Your Job
②
② 창의적 사고는 문제점을 분석하는 것으로부터 출발한다.
Various Festivals in Europe
③ 과학 프로젝트는 학생들의 창의적 사고 형성에 도움이 된다. ③
Vacation Matters to Europeans!
④ 학생들은 창의적 생각을 남에게 납득시키는 방법을 배워야 한다. ④
Europe: Most Popular Vacation Site
⑤ 학생들은 창의적 사고의 가치를 실용적 측면에서 분석해야 한다. ⑤
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
영어 영역(A 형)
Laketown Sports Camp 2013
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점] 29. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
When you have ideas you like, you often think everyone  일치하는 것은?
else should feel the same way. If they don’t, it very often 
becomes  a  matter  of  “they  just  don’t  understand!”  If  a 
① Laketown Sports Camp 2013
colleague  around  you  doesn’t  understand  your  idea,  or  its 
June 24th- August 23rd
potential,  you  are  being  given  an  important  message. 
②
(Monday-Friday, 9:00 a.m.-4:00 p.m.)
Maybe your view of a problem  that you think you are 
③
solving is not shared by other coworkers? If your colleague 
cannot see it, your consumers may not  either. Think about 
④
it. Make constant efforts until everyone you explain your idea 
to  understands  it.  This  is  all  to  do  with  find  simple 
⑤
solutions to our daily communication problems.
The city of Laketown offers a sports camp for all children 
seven and older.
Campers take swimming lessons every afternoon.
?
Our weekly activities include basketball, soccer, tennis, 
?
badminton, and much more.
Campers have the option to bring their own lunch from 
?
home or purchase lunch from the snack bar.
(A),  (B),  (C)
28. 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
Registration Information
적절한 것은?  [3점]
Period May 27th June 7th
－
England’s  plan  to  establish  colonies  in  North  America, 
Fee $125 for a week (insurance fee included)
starting in the late sixteenth century, was founded on a 
(A) false/valid idea. It was generally assumed that Virginia,  For more information, visit www.laketowncamp.com or 
the  region  of  the  North  American  continent  to  which  call (310) 555-2211.
England  laid  claim,  would  have  the  same  climate  as  the 
Mediterranean  region  of  Europe,  since  it  lay  at  similar 
① 참가자의 연령 제한이 없다.
latitudes. As a result, the English hoped that the American 
② 참가자는 매일 오전에 수영 강습을 받는다.
colonies,  once  established,  would  be  able  to  supply 
③ 점심은 캠프에서 무료로 제공한다.
Mediterranean goods such as olives and fruit and reduce England’s 
5
④ 등록 기간은  월 말까지이다.
(B) dependence/restriction on imports from continental Europe. 
⑤ 보험료는 등록비에 포함되어 있다.
One prospectus claimed that the colonies would provide “the 
wines, fruit and salt of France and Spain ... the silks of Persia 
and Italy.” Similarly, (C) abundant/scarce timber would do 
away  with  the  need  to  import  wood  from  Scandinavia.  In 
short, America was mistakenly expected to be a land of plenty 
that would quickly turn a profit.
*latitude: 위도  **prospectus: 사업 설명서, 투자 설명서
(A) (B) (C)
false dependence abundant
① …… ……
false dependence scarce
② …… ……
false restriction abundant
③ …… ……
valid restriction scarce
④ …… ……
valid restriction abundant
⑤ …… ……
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
영어 영역(A 형)
Wilson High School Library Monthly Observatory Nights
30. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과  31. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하지 않는  것은? 일치하지 않는  것은?
Wilson High School Library Monthly Observatory Nights
We are very happy to announce that our library has been 
selected as one of the top 10 libraries in the nation this 
year.
Hours
Monday through Friday 9:00 a.m.   8:00 p.m.
－
Closed on weekends and holidays
Check-out and Return Policy
Each person is allowed to check out up to 5 books at a time.
We  offer  a  free  educational  program,  “Observatory 
Books must be returned within 2 weeks from the check-out 
Nights,”  on  the  third  Thursday  of  every  month.  It 
date.
features a lecture and telescopic observing from the 
observatory roof.
Special Events
Meet the Author (June 14th)
? Admission and parking are free.
?
- Come  and  meet  Janet  Oxford,  the  author  of  the 
The lectures are intended for high school students.
bestseller The Treasure of the Desert. ?
Seating is limited and available on a first-come basis.
Book Sale (June 21st)  ?
?
- All new books will be 20% off, and all used books  Doors open at 5:00 p.m.; the program begins at 8:00 p.m.
?
will be 50% off.
If it is rainy on the day of the event, the program will 
?
be canceled.
For more information, call the Education Affairs Office 
at (617) 555-2176.
① 매달 셋째 목요일에 제공되는 프로그램이다.
② 입장료와 주차료는 무료이다.
10 ③ 강연회는 고등학생 대상이다.
① 올해  대 우수 도서관으로 선정되었다.
5
④ 프로그램은 오후  시에 시작된다.
② 주말과 공휴일에는 도서관을 열지 않는다.
2 ⑤ 행사 당일에 비가 오면 프로그램이 취소된다.
③ 대출 도서는  주 내에 반납해야 한다.
6
④ 베스트셀러 작가와의 만남이  월에 있다.
⑤ 도서 판매 행사에서 새 책은 할인받을 수 없다.
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
영어 영역(A 형)
32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? [34～36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. It is known that people are extremely limited in the amount 
of information that they can process at any given time. A 
common metaphor in early theories of attention is the concept 
of a bottleneck. This metaphor is especially appealing because 
it matches our understanding about attention. The narrow neck 
of a bottle restricts the flow into or out of the bottle. This kind 
of flow in the narrow passageway is similar to the way people 
process information. In other words, this bottleneck limits the 
 of information to which we can pay attention. 
Thus,  when  one  message  is  currently  flowing  through  a 
The  above  graph  shows  the  comparison  between  the 
bottleneck, the other messages must be left behind.
  [3점]
allocated budget and actual spending for six departments at 
*metaphor: 은유
Triton Ventures in 2012.  The Customer Service department 
①
value sources quantity
was  allocated  60,000  dollars,  which  was  greater  than  the  ① ② ③
reliability familiarity
amount allocated to any other department.  On the other  ④ ⑤
②
hand, in terms of actual spending, the top two departments 
35. Many people have pointed out that personal responsibility 
that spent the most were Marketing and Development.  The 
③
can often be  . Consider how often 
Customer Service and Information Technology departments 
you’ve passed someone who is pulled over on the side of the 
spent the same amount of money, which was 20,000 dollars. 
road with car trouble. It is easy to justify your failure to help by 
The actual spending by the Administration department was 
④
telling  yourself  someone  else  will  stop.  Corporations  add 
less than half the allocated budget.  The Sales department 
⑤
another layer of complication to the story of reduced personal 
showed the largest gap between the allocated budget and its 
responsibility in group settings because corporations are set up 
actual spending among the six departments.
to assign legal responsibility to the corporation itself instead of 
to  its  members.  There  are  other  complex  organizations  in 
which the individual members are often not sure of their impact 
or  power  to  bring  about  change.  In  this  kind  of  culture, 
“someone else will do it” is a common excuse.
  [3점]
lost in groups easily recognized
① ②
decreased by stress strengthened by law
③ ④
shaped at an early age
⑤
Tom 36. Appearance creates the first impression customers have of 
33. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
food,  and  first  impressions  are  important.  No  matter  how 
As Tom stood on stage at the school play, he could feel the 
appealing  the  taste,  an  unattractive  appearance  is  hard  to 
watchful eyes of the audience. Being in the spotlight made him 
overlook. As humans, we do “eat with our eyes” because our 
feel tense. He tried to deliver his lines as best as he could, but 
sense of sight is more highly developed than the other senses. 
he could feel his voice shaking. Suddenly, he realized he had 
The sense of sight is so highly developed in humans that 
missed a sentence. Without going back, he went on as though 
messages received from other senses are often ignored if they 
nothing had happened. But by the time he finished, his hands 
conflict with what is seen. Yellow candy is expected to be 
felt sweaty and his heart was racing. No one commented on his 
lemon-flavored,  and  if  it  is  grape-flavored,  many  people 
mistake apart  from  his  drama  teacher.  “Well  done,”  the 
―
.  Strawberry 
teacher said. “Acting is like learning to ride a bike. You may 
ice  cream  tinted  with  red  food  coloring  seems  to  have  a 
not get it perfect the first time. You may fall off a few times, 
stronger strawberry flavor than one that has no added food 
yet  each  time  you  get  back  on  you  do  it  better.  Your 
coloring, even when there is no real difference.
  [3점]
performance may not have been perfect, but it was great.” His 
teacher’s comforting words brought a smile to Tom’s face. cannot correctly identify the flavor
① 
will not favor the grape-flavored candy
② 
bored excited nervous relieved
① → ② → can clearly sense the difference in flavor
③ 
delighted regretful curious disappointed
③ → ④ → will be instantly attracted to the grape flavor
④ 
envious embarrassed
⑤ → will enjoy the subtle difference between them
⑤ 
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
영어 영역(A 형)
(A),  (B)
37. 다음  글의  빈칸  에  들어갈  말로  가장  적절한  39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 
것은? 곳은?  [3점]
When plants were first grouped together, it was merely for 
But the ones in which he could get up and do things like 
convenience. Even today, plants may be categorized together 
industrial arts, drama, science projects, or P.E. were always 
in  unnatural  groupings  in  order  to  make  them  easier  to 
his favorites.
identify.  (A) ,  some  wildflower  books  arrange 
together  all  white-flowered  species  or  all  yellow-flowered  Jason always seemed to have a tough time in classes, except 
species.  However,  such  groupings  do  not  reflect  natural  in the ones where he could do something. In the classes in 
relationships  and  make  it  difficult  to  recognize  family  which the teachers just stood and talked, or told everyone to 
characteristics. We don’t infer that all persons with red hair  read, he seemed to get bored and restless. ( ) He soon 
①
are more closely related to each other than they are to those  realized that he was not a slow or unmotivated learner; he was 
with dark hair; likewise, all long-haired dogs are not more  a  kinesthetic  learner.  ( )  Once  he  figured  this  out,  he 
②
closely  related  to  each  other  than  they  are  to  short-haired  started to use this information to his advantage. ( ) He 
③
dogs. Modern botanists,  (B) , try to group plants  would draw out what he learned from class on notes, posters, 
according to their natural relationships. and doodles. ( ) He would act out things and work with 
④
*botanist: 식물학자 other students on projects using role play and drama. ( ⑤ ) 
This helped his learning come alive, and he was less bored. As 
(A) (B)
a result, he not only enjoyed school more, but his grades also 
For example moreover
① …… went up.
For example therefore
② ……
In contrast however *kinesthetic: 운동 감각의
③ ……
In contrast therefore
④ ……
Nevertheless however
⑤ ……
40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Lemonade is the perfect refreshment on a sunny day, and 
it also contains a lot of vitamin C. Here’s a quick and easy 
38. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
way to make lemonade.
People believe that “good books” are educational and useful 
to academic success. However, it appears that the nature of  (A) Wash the lemons you’ve prepared and cut them in half. 
written language itself helps increase academic achievement,  Then, squeeze out as much juice as you can into a bowl. 
regardless of a book’s quality.  Even books that provide  You can squeeze the lemons by hand, but it’s easier if you 
①
only  pleasure  will  increase  the  confidence  of  students  and  use a lemon squeezer.
encourage  them  to  try  to  read  more  technical  materials  in  (B) Then simply mix together the lemon juice, sugar, and 
school.  ②Comics,  magazines,  audiobooks,  and  topics  of  water in a jug, and stir. Pour it into a glass, add some ice, 
interest on the Internet are sometimes not considered “real”  and enjoy your lemonade!
reading materials.  Students should try to guess the meaning 
③
(C) Prepare four lemons, 100g of sugar, one liter of water, 
of new words while they read rather than look them up in the 
and some ice. You also need a bowl, a jug, and a spoon. 
dictionary.  However, these materials let students enjoy the 
④
Don’t forget to prepare a cutting board and a knife.
pleasure of reading and gain information, literacy skills, and 
more.  This  “light”  reading  is  actually  very  beneficial  (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
⑤ ① － － ② － －
because  it  is  effortless  reading,  which  improves  reading  (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③ － － ④ － －
fluency. (C) (B) (A)
⑤ － －
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
영어 영역(A 형)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. (B)
Because the Internet is free space where anybody can post  To prepare for the race, both Zach and Tony bought a 
anything, it can be full of all sorts of useless data. As a  specially made swimming suit that could minimize resistance 
result, organized knowledge could easily get corrupted or  against water and help them swim faster. But they found out 
lost in a sea of junk data. For books, there are various filters  that this type of special suit had not been allowed in previous 
that help readers distinguish between reliable and unreliable  races. Both Zach and Tony asked the swimming coach if 
information.  On  the  Internet,  the  relation  between  the  they could wear it. (b)He said that he would let them know 
producer and the consumer of information tends to be direct,  before the race.
so nothing protects the consumer from polluted information. 
(C)
There  are,  of  course,  advantages  to  the  free  exchange  of 
information,  and  I  do  believe  any  producers  of  data  On the other hand, Zach’s conscience whispered that a true 
should  have  the  freedom  to  make  them  available  online.  victory comes from fair competition. After a long conflict, 
However,  I  am  also  convinced  that  users  should  be  (c)he finally decided to be honest. He told Tony about the 
 by intermediary services.  suit, and they both joined the race wearing the suits. Tony 
There need to be some forms of guides and filters provided  won  the  race,  and  Zach  congratulated  him.  This  was  the 
by responsible individuals and organizations. Otherwise, we  sweetest second place Zach had ever won.
may no longer be able to distinguish between the intellectual 
space  of  information  and  a  polluted  environment  of  (D)
meaningless data. Thus, reliable intermediary services will 
Nothing  was  decided  during  the  morning,  but  shortly 
be needed in the future.
before the race, the coach told Zach that (d)he and Tony 
*intermediary: 중개의 could wear the suit. He asked Zach to tell Tony about it. 
After hearing what his coach said, Zach faced a difficult 
choice. At first, he hesitated to tell (e)his friend about the 
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
news. He thought that if he did not tell Tony about it, he 
Why Do People Shop Online?
① would definitely win the race.
War Against Internet Addiction
②
We Need Guides on the Internet
③ (A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
How to Build Your Own Website
④
가장 적절한 것은?
Cyber Space: Creating a New Identity
⑤
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
① － － ② － －
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③ － － ④ － －
(D) (C) (B)
⑤ － －
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
given the right to vote
①
(a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
offered an online course
②
것은?
provided with more books
③
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
allowed to use their real names ① ② ③ ④ ⑤
④
protected from corrupt knowledge
⑤
Zach
45. 윗글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
100
①  미터 자유형 결승전에 진출했다.
Tony
②  를 가장 큰 경쟁자로 생각했다.
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
③  특수 제작된 수영복을 샀다.
(A) ④  Tony의 준우승을 축하해 주었다.
⑤  코치의 말을 듣고 어려운 선택에 직면했다.
Zach was a 14-year-old boy, and he was a good swimmer. 
He advanced to the 100 meter freestyle final. Although there 
were many competitors, Zach knew that the winner should 
be between (a)him and Tony. They were best friends, but 
*  확인 사항
Zach considered him as his biggest competitor. They both 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
were great swimmers and had won an equal number of races.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터  22번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 
①  양초를 만드는 절차
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다.
②  등산 시 유의할 사항
③  적절한 휴식의 필요성
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ④  취미 생활을 하는 이유
적절한 것을 고르시오. ⑤  스트레스의 다양한 요인
No, I don’t have a computer.
① 
Right, I’ll call you when I’m done.
② 
Yeah, I saved it in my cell phone.
③  7. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Yes, I’ll buy you a new cell phone.
④ 
①  아이와 함께 텃밭을 가꾸면 아이가 채소를 잘 먹게 된다.
Sorry, you’ve got the wrong number.
⑤ 
②  텃밭에서 채소를 직접 기르면 가족 경제에 도움이 된다.
③  가족의 건강을 위해 유기농 채소를 구입할 필요가 있다. 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  ④  지역 농산물을 구입하면 경제 활성화에 기여할 수 있다.
적절한 것을 고르시오. ⑤  채소 위주의 식습관은 아이의 두뇌 발달을 촉진한다. 
It’s true. She’ll start reading sooner or later.
① 
 I’ll ask her teacher to choose her next time.
②
Right. She must go to a new school.
③  8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
Sorry to hear that. Better luck next time.
④ 
①  상담 교사－학생
Great. She must have worked on reading a lot.
⑤ 
②  여행사 직원－여행객
③  수의사－애완동물 주인
3. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ④  동물원 사육사－관람객
⑤  국립공원 직원－탐방객
적절한 것을 고르시오.
No, I’m not sure where you’re going.
① 
You’re welcome. I’m happy to watch him.
② 
Don’t worry. I’ll come over around 10 a.m. 9. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
③ 
Never mind. I’ll make him dinner tomorrow. 고르시오.
④ 
Okay. I’ll let him play but only for an hour.
⑤ 
4. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
①  제철 과일 소비를 권장하려고
②  과일 보관 용기를 광고하려고
③  얼룩 제거 용품을 홍보하려고
④  과일 껍질 활용법을 소개하려고
⑤  과일 껍질의 영양소를 설명하려고
5. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
10. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
①  뇌우 발생 시 대처 요령
고르시오.
②  뇌우의 다양한 발생 원인
③  지구의 급격한 기후 변화  ①  마중 나가기 ②  쿠키 사다 주기
④  날씨와 심리 변화의 상관관계 ③  도시락 주문하기 ④  교통사고 신고하기
⑤  날씨가 야외 활동에 미치는 영향 ⑤  사무실에 데려다 주기
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
영어 영역(B 형)
11. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을  18. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
고르시오.  적절한 것을 고르시오.
to rent a laptop to visit a museum Man:
①  ② 
to surf the Internet to find some photos
③  ④  You must have enjoyed the party a lot.
① 
to review the report
⑤  It’s nice of you to take care of my baby.
② 
I’m so excited that your baby can walk now.
③ 
12. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 배낭여행을 갈 수 없는  이유를 고르시오.  I can’t wait to see what your baby will choose.
④ 
Thank you for inviting me to your graduation party.
①  할아버지 댁에서 지내야 해서 ⑤ 
②  친구와 만날 약속이 있어서
③  부모님이 허락하지 않아서
19. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
④  방학 숙제를 해야 해서
적절한 것을 고르시오.
⑤  제주도에 가야 해서
Woman:
13. 대화를 듣고,  선거 포스터에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은  Maybe your luck has run out.
① 
것을 고르시오. Your wish has finally become a reality.
② 
You’d better apply for the music program.
①  후보 기호 ②  후보 사진 ③ 
If you keep it up, you might get tickets.
③  학교 로고 ④  학교 사진 ④ 
I’m so surprised that you were on TV.
⑤  선거 슬로건 ⑤ 
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
Julia Samuel
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장 
$215 $225 $240 $250 $270
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤  적절한 것을 고르시오.
Julia: Samuel, 
15. 장학금에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고,  일치하지  않는  것을 
could you give me a ride home?
① 
고르시오.
would you teach me how to park?
② 
①  선정 과정은 두 단계로 구성된다.
when did you get your driver’s license?
③ 
②  면접관은 학생들이 추천한 교사들이다.
what happened after you parked your car?
④ 
$1,000
③  개인별로 학기당  가 지급된다.
how many times did you take the road test?
⑤ 
④  신청 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
3
⑤  명의 수혜자는 다음 달에 발표될 것이다.
four-eyed fish
16. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 
고르시오.  [3점]
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
①  각각의 눈이 두 부분으로 나누어져 있다.
21. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
②  수면 아래위를 동시에 볼 수 있다.
developmental stages of human history
① 
③  남아메리카에서 주로 발견된다.
the characteristics of scientific inventions
④  작은 물고기를 잡아먹기도 한다. ② 
the difference between speaking and writing
⑤  작은 어항에서 키우기에 적합하다. ③ 
the significance of writing in human history
④ 
ways to promote invention in the modern world
⑤ 
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  여자가 선택한 복사기 모델을 
고르시오.
22. 인류의 발명품으로 언급되지 않은  것은?
①  전구 ②  비행기
③  전화기 ④  현미경
①
⑤  망원경
②
③
④   이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의 
⑤ 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
영어 영역(B 형)
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Everyone  would  like  to  assume  that  their  wonderful,  In the past, many public-sector recreation providers allowed 
creative ideas will sell themselves. But as Galileo, Edvard  people  free  access  or  charged  for  permits  to  control  the 
Munch, Toni Morrison, Sylvia Plath, and millions of others  amount or season for different recreational activities such as 
have discovered, they do not. On the contrary, creative ideas  fishing  or  horse-riding.  However,  governments  and  other 
are usually viewed with suspicion and distrust. Thus, students  public agencies are finding that funding to maintain sites and 
need to learn how to persuade other people of the value of  facilities, to cope with increased demand on the landscape, is 
their  ideas.  This  selling  is  part  of  the  practical  aspect  of  becoming  difficult  to  maintain.  Opportunities  to  charge 
creative thinking. If students do a science project, it is a good  visitors for appropriate services to help compensate for these 
idea for them to present it and demonstrate why it makes an  costs are being considered as one solution. This is a sensitive 
important contribution. If they develop a plan for a new form  matter, as free access for all people to the outdoors is a much 
of government, they should explain why it is better than the  cherished right. There is also an additional dilemma for public 
existing form of government. agencies where recreation facilities are already provided from 
public  money,  and  it  could  be  argued  that  the  taxpayer  is 
① 공정한 판단은 타인의 의견을 경청하는 데서 시작된다.
being charged twice. Thus, care is needed by public bodies to 
② 창의적 사고는 문제점을 분석하는 것으로부터 출발한다.
ensure that charges are only made for services that are clearly 
③ 과학 프로젝트는 학생들의 창의적 사고 형성에 도움이 된다.
additional to the provision of free access.
④ 학생들은 창의적 생각을 남에게 납득시키는 방법을 배워야 한다.
⑤ 학생들은 창의적 사고의 가치를 실용적 측면에서 분석해야 한다.  ① How to Use Public Facilities for Outdoor Activities
Public Recreation Services: To Charge or Not?
②
Access to Public Facilities: Denied or Delayed?
③
A Short History of Public Recreation Facilities
④
Preserving the Landscape: Torn Between Two Demands
⑤
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
In the nineteenth century, a decisive moment occurred when 
people in advertising and journalism discovered that if they 
framed their stories and appeals with fear, they could capture 
our attention. It is an emotion we find hard to resist or control, 
and  so  they  constantly  shifted  our  focus  to  new  possible 
sources  of  anxiety:  the  latest  health  scare,  the  new  crime 
wave, and endless hazards in the environment of which we 
were  not  aware.  With  the  increasing  sophistication  of  the  she[her]
26. 밑줄 친  가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
media and the haunting quality of the imagery, they have been 
Zaynab  Fawwaz  was  born  into  a  poor  family  in  South 
able to give us the feeling that we are fragile creatures in an 
Lebanon. As a young girl  she went to Alexandria with the 
①
environment full of danger even though we live in a world 
―
Egyptian  family  for  whom  she  worked.  Her  mistress  was 
infinitely  safer  and  more  predictable  than  anything  our 
intrigued  by  her  maid’s  native  intelligence  and  introduced 
ancestors  knew.  With  their  help,  our  anxieties  have  only 
Zaynab to  her literate friend, Fatima. She, in turn, taught 
②
increased.
her reading, writing and arithmetic. Zaynab quickly learned 
①  the crisis of modern journalism what ③her teacher had to offer and in time went on to study 
the various sources of human fears with Egyptian scholars. Eventually,  she became very active 
②  ④
the media’s exploitation of human anxieties in women’s issues and she wrote some pioneering poetry and 
③ 
the importance of advertising and journalism essays focused on women’s rights. The most famous of  her 
④  ⑤
the fragile nature of human life in modern society essays was The Zaynab Letters.
⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
영어 영역(B 형)
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점] 29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Given  that  music  appears  to  enhance  physical  and 
mental skills, are there circumstances where music is 
damaging to performance? One domain  which this is of 
① ②
considerable  significance  is  music’s  potentially  damaging 
effects on the ability to drive safely. Evidence suggests an 
association between loud, fast music and reckless driving, but 
how might music’s ability to influence driving in this way 
be  explained?  One  possibility  is  that  drivers  adjust  to 
③
temporal  regularities  in  music,  and  that  their  speed  is 
④
influenced accordingly. In other words, just as faster music 
The  above  graph  shows  the  comparison  between  the 
causes people to eat faster,  so it causes people to drive at 
⑤
allocated budget and actual spending for six departments at 
faster speeds, as they engage mentally and physically with 
Triton Ventures in 2012.  The Customer Service department 
ongoing repeated structures in the music. ①
was  allocated  60,000  dollars,  which  was  greater  than  the 
amount allocated to any other department.  On the other 
②
hand, in terms of actual spending, the top two departments 
that spent the most were Marketing and Development.  The 
③
Customer Service and Information Technology departments 
spent the same amount of money, which was 20,000 dollars. 
The actual spending by the Administration department was 
④
less than half the allocated budget.  The Sales department 
⑤
showed the largest gap between the allocated budget and its 
actual spending among the six departments.
(A),  (B),  (C)
28. 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
적절한 것은?
Georgia O’Keeffe
30. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 
England’s  plan  to  establish  colonies  in  North  America, 
것은?
starting in the late sixteenth century, was founded on a 
In her art, Georgia O’Keeffe clearly showed a pioneering 
(A) false/valid idea. It was generally assumed that Virginia, 
spirit and an intensely individual style. At age twenty-seven, 
the  region  of  the  North  American  continent  to  which 
while teaching art in South Carolina, O’Keeffe began a series 
England  laid  claim,  would  have  the  same  climate  as  the 
of simple, abstract charcoal drawings that expressed her own 
Mediterranean  region  of  Europe,  since  it  lay  at  similar 
ideas and feelings. She sent these drawings to a friend in New 
latitudes. As a result, the English hoped that the American 
York, who showed them to Alfred Stieglitz, the owner of the 
colonies,  once  established,  would  be  able  to  supply 
influential gallery 291. Stieglitz hailed them as the “purest, 
Mediterranean goods such as olives and fruit and reduce England’s 
finest,  sincerest  things.”  O’Keeffe’s  greatest  source  of 
(B) dependence/restriction on imports from continental Europe. 
inspiration was nature. Her best-known paintings are large, 
One prospectus claimed that the colonies would provide “the 
extreme close-ups of flowers; the simplified and magnified 
wines, fruit and salt of France and Spain ... the silks of Persia 
views compel us to look at them in a new way and to discover 
and Italy.” Similarly, (C) abundant/scarce timber would do 
their inner essence. At the same time, the paintings become 
away  with  the  need  to  import  wood  from  Scandinavia.  In 
abstract  arrangements  of  color  and  line,  light  and  shadow. 
short, America was mistakenly expected to be a land of plenty 
While in New Mexico, she was also fascinated by the simple 
that would quickly turn a profit.
geometric grace of adobe churches and the majesty of the 
*latitude: 위도  **prospectus: 사업 설명서, 투자 설명서 desert.
(A) (B) (C) *adobe: 흙을 재료로 한 건축 양식의 일종
false dependence abundant
① …… …… 27 South Carolina
①  세에  에서 미술을 가르쳤다.
false dependence scarce
② …… …… Stieglitz
②  자신의 드로잉 작품들을  에게 보냈다.
false restriction abundant
③ …… ……
③  영감을 얻은 가장 큰 원천은 자연이었다.
valid restriction scarce
④ …… ……
④  가장 잘 알려진 그림들은 클로즈업한 꽃 그림이다.
valid restriction abundant
⑤ …… …… New Mexico
⑤  에서 사막의 장엄함에 매료되었다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
영어 영역(B 형)
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 33. Suppose  a  survivor  from  an  airplane  crash  with  severe 
injuries struggles for days through the jungle but dies just 
31. Appearance creates the first impression customers have of 
before reaching a village. It is tempting to think “if only he had 
food,  and  first  impressions  are  important.  No  matter  how 
managed to walk to the village, he would have been rescued.” 
appealing  the  taste,  an  unattractive  appearance  is  hard  to 
But suppose you must try to console the victim’s relatives. 
overlook. As humans, we do “eat with our eyes” because our 
What might you say? Or  suppose  you  wish  to  defend  the 
sense of sight is more highly developed than the other senses. 
rescue  team  who  got  as  far  as  the  village  but  no  further. 
The sense of sight is so highly developed in humans that 
Your  motivation  to  console  or  defend may influence the 
messages received from other senses are often ignored if they 
alternative you imagine. You may decide to emphasize the 
conflict with what is seen. Yellow candy is expected to be 
severity of the victim’s injuries and suggest “even if he had 
lemon-flavored,  and  if  it  is  grape-flavored,  many  people 
managed to walk to the village, he still would have died.” 
.  Strawberry 
Sometimes thoughts about what might have been change an 
ice  cream  tinted  with  red  food  coloring  seems  to  have  a 
antecedent event (the victim walked to the village) but leave 
stronger strawberry flavor than one that has no added food 
the  outcome  unchanged  (he  still  died).  “Even  if...” 
coloring, even when there is no real difference.
conditionals  have  been  called  “semifactual”  because  they 
cannot correctly identify the flavor
①  combine a counterfactual antecedent and a factual consequence. 
will not favor the grape-flavored candy
②  Imagined  semifactual  alternatives  are  intriguing  because, 
③  can clearly sense the difference in flavor unlike  other  thoughts  about  what  might  have  been,  they 
④  will be instantly attracted to the grape flavor suggest that  .  [3점]
will enjoy the subtle difference between them
⑤ 
the consequence is unimaginable
① 
the antecedent is inevitable 
② 
the outcome is inevitable
③ 
the antecedent is unpredictable
④ 
the consequence is unpredictable
⑤ 
32. The  Rust  Belt  is  notorious  for  its  poor  air  quality.  For 
decades,  coal  plants,  steel  production,  and  auto  emissions 
have pumped particulates like sulfate into the atmosphere over  34. The  so-called  Mozart  effect―listening  to  Mozart  will 
the  eastern  U.S.  Especially  before  air  quality  laws  began  make  your  child  smarter is  a  good  example  of 
―
appearing in the 1970s, particulate pollution was behind acid   by the media 
rain, respiratory disease, and ozone depletion. But a new study  through hype not warranted by the research. It all started when 
from Harvard University suggests that the Rust Belt’s thick  researchers  reported  that  after  exposure  to  a  selection  of 
particulate fog may have helped slow down the effects of  Mozart’s music, college students showed an increase in spatial 
climate change, particularly when it was thickest. Throughout  reasoning for about 10 minutes on tasks like putting together 
the 20th century, global temperatures have gone up by just  pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. Note first that the research was done 
under one degree Celsius. But in the U.S., eastern and central  on college students, not infants, and that the effect was very 
states haven’t seen the same rise. In fact, temperatures there  brief. In addition, no one’s been able to replicate the research. 
actually decreased over the same period. The reason seems to  The increase in spatial reasoning, it turns out, can be generated 
be particulate pollution. Instead of trapping warm air in the  by any auditory stimulation (e.g., listening to a short story or 
atmosphere  like  carbon  dioxide,  fine  particles  like  sulfate  other types of music) that keeps people alert while being tested. 
reflect the sun’s light and heat. They may even group with  However, none of this has stopped eager parents spurred on 
―
watery cloud droplets, which do the same thing. The effect  by  fantastic  claims  from  unethical  companies from 
―
is  . purchasing Mozart CDs for their babies.
  [3점]
*particulate: 분진, 미립 물질 *hype: 과대 광고(선전)
①  an accumulation of carbon dioxide ① the bond between parents and children exaggerated
a net cooling across entire regions a genuine scientific innovation being discarded
②  ②
③  a steep acceleration of global warming ③ a scientific finding being distorted
④  a significant improvement in air quality  ④ the correlation between reasoning and music being rejected
a slow but steady increase in temperatures the convergence of music and physiology made possible
⑤  ⑤
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
영어 영역(B 형)
35. As  the  structures  of  our  world  and  the  conditions  of  37. All human societies have economic systems within which 
certainty  have  yielded  to  an  avalanche  of  change,  the  goods and services are produced, distributed, and consumed. 
extent  of  our  longing  for  stable,  definitive  leadership  In one sense, the economic aspect of culture is simply the sum 
.  The  fault  of  the  choices  people  make  regarding  these  areas  of  their 
lies  not  with  leadership  but  rather  with  ourselves  and  our  lives.  These  choices  critically  determine  much  of  people’s 
expectations.  In  the  old  days,  leaders  were  supposed  to  lives.  (A) ,  choosing  to  become  a  farmer  rather 
make sense of chaos, to make certainty out of doubt, and  than an insurance broker may determine where you live, who 
to  create  positive  action  plans  for  the  resolution  of  you are likely to meet, the sorts of behaviors you will expect 
paradoxes.  Good  leaders  straightened  things  out.  Should  in  your  spouse  and  offspring,  and  so  on.  However,  such 
chaos rear its ugly head, the leader was expected to restore  choices  are  not  unlimited;  rather,  they  are  limited  by  our 
normality  immediately.  But  chaos  is  now  considered  cultures,  traditions,  and  technologies.  (B) ,  our 
normal,  paradoxes  cannot  be  resolved,  and  certainty  is  environments set the boundaries within which choices about 
possible  only  to  the  level  of  high  probability.  Leadership  the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and 
that attempts to deliver in terms of fixing any of these can  services are made. To the extent that economic systems are 
only fail. And that is exactly what is happening. part of culture, people in different cultures have different sorts 
  [3점]
of economic behavior.
*an avalanche of: 많은, 쇄도하는
can only be measured by our will to establish it (A) (B)
①
② has made traditional leadership more irreplaceable ① By contrast …… Consequently
③ can create viable action plans for restoring normality ② For example …… Conversely
④ has vastly reduced the probability of resolving paradoxes ③ For example …… Furthermore
Similarly Instead
has been exceeded only by the impossibility of finding it ④ ……
⑤
Similarly Nevertheless
⑤ ……
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
When  a  company  comes  out  with  a  new  product,  its 
36.
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
competitors  typically  go  on  the  defensive,  doing  whatever 
they can to  (A)  the odds that the offering will eat  Organic farmers grow crops that are no less plagued by 
into their sales. Responses might include increasing marketing  pests than those of conventional farmers; insects generally 
efforts,  offering  discounts  to  channel  partners,  and  even  do not discriminate between organic and conventional as 
lobbying  for  regulations  that  would  hinder  the  rival’s  well as we do.
expansion. In many cases, though, such actions are misguided. 
(A) However, most organic farmers have no choice but to rely 
Although the conventional wisdom that a rival’s launch will 
on chemicals as necessary supplements to their operations. 
hurt  profits  is  often  correct,  my  research  shows  that 
With pests often consuming up to 40 percent of the crops 
companies  sometimes  see  profits  increase  after  a  rival’s 
grown in the United States, they do so as a matter of 
launch. The underlying mechanism is pretty simple: When a 
course. 
company comes out with a new product, it often raises the 
prices  of  its  existing  products.  This  might  be  designed  to  (B) They  might  refer  to  these  substances  as  “botanical 
make the new product look  (B)  and thus more  extracts.” But according to Ned Groth, a senior scientist 
attractive by comparison. As that company adjusts its pricing,  at Consumers Union, these toxins “are not necessarily 
its  competitors  can  do  the  same  without  risking  customer  less worrisome because they are natural.”
defections over price.
  [3점] (C) It is true that they are far more likely than conventional 
*defection: 이탈 farmers to practice environmentally beneficial forms of 
biological control, and that they are also more likely to 
(A) (B)
sensibly diversify their crops to reduce infestation. 
calculate exceptional
① ……
calculate more striking *infestation: 횡행, 만연
② ……
③ eliminate …… more upgraded ①  (A)－(C)－(B) ②  (B)－(A)－(C)
④ reduce …… up-to-date ③  (B)－(C)－(A) ④  (C)－(A)－(B)
⑤ reduce …… cheaper ⑤  (C)－(B)－(A)
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
영어 영역(B 형)
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한  [41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
곳은?
Carrying capacity is the number of individuals that the 
But the ones in which he could get up and do things like  local resources can sustain. Individuals in a population that 
industrial arts, drama, science projects, or P.E. were always  has exceeded the carrying capacity of its habitat may have 
his favorites. poor  health  and  suffer  from  malnutrition  because  of  the 
compromised  living  conditions.  When  this  happens,  the 
Jason always seemed to have a tough time in classes, except 
weakest individuals may die, or the population as a whole 
in the ones where he could do something. In the classes in 
may become more vulnerable to further environmental stress 
which the teachers just stood and talked, or told everyone to 
or disease. Sometimes a large number of individuals in a 
read, he seemed to get bored and restless. ( ) He soon 
① population  die  as  a  result  of  overshooting  the  carrying 
realized that he was not a slow or unmotivated learner; he was 
capacity of their habitat. This is known as a die-off. 
a  kinesthetic  learner.  ( )  Once  he  figured  this  out,  he 
② Certain  animals  and  plants  have  a  built-in  sense  of 
started to use this information to his advantage. ( ) He 
③ carrying capacity, so that instead of overshooting and having 
would draw out what he learned from class on notes, posters, 
a  die-off,  they  remain  within  the  limits  of  their  habitat’s 
and doodles. ( ) He would act out things and work with 
④ ability  to  support  them.  Lake  trout,  for  instance,  stop 
other students on projects using role play and drama. ( ) 
⑤ breeding  as  prolifically  when  the  population  density 
This helped his learning come alive, and he was less bored. As 
increases  too  dramatically.  Although  this  is  the  result  of 
a result, he not only enjoyed school more, but his grades also 
individual  responses  to  chemical  signals  from  other  trout 
went up.
rather than a thought-out response on the part of the trout, 
*kinesthetic: 운동 감각의 the result is that population numbers may   
for extended periods. The trout will produce more offspring 
and  mature  to  a  reproductive  size  at  a  faster  rate  when 
(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
populations are threatened, such as when aggressive fishing 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
takes place. When space and food are scarce, such as when a 
A narrative is not a myth the first time it is told, but only a  lot  of  fish  are  living  together  in  a  small  pond,  the  trout 
story or an account. What makes a story a myth is the fact  remain  smaller  and  reproduce  more  slowly.  Experiments 
that it is received by a given society and that a given society  have shown that no matter what number of lake trout a pond 
participates in its transmission. Obviously, it is difficult to  is stocked with in the beginning, the population will increase 
determine just when any story becomes a myth, but it is  until it reaches a particular density, then level off at about the 
clear that a narrative is not a myth when it is first told. The  same number.
intentions of the first narrator and the last narrator can be  *prolific: 다산(多産)의
the same, but this still does not give any special status to the 
creator of a myth. It is far more important to realize that the 
41. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
intentions of a given society in transmitting a narrative may 
nature’s way of regulating population density
have nothing to do with the purposes of its author. Thus we  ①
the relationship between nutrition and reproduction
can never identify any individual creator of a myth. So long  ②
as myth is a collective narrative by definition, the only  ③ the significance of habitat protection for local ecosystems
relevant consideration are the mentality and purposes of the  the necessity of protecting the lake trout population
④
society for which the myth is a myth. how to preserve various habitats for lake trout
⑤
??
Given the  (A)  nature of a myth, a narrative becomes 
a myth only when a given society accepts and  (B)  it, 
regardless of the intentions of its author.
(A) (B) 42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
① collective …… transmits ① rise quickly
② creative …… distributes ② be countless 
③ mental …… modernizes ③ remain steady
primitive circulates
④ …… ④ be unknown 
social evaluates
⑤ …… fall to zero
⑤
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
영어 영역(B 형)
(A)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
(A) 가장 적절한 것은?
(B) (D) (C)
In  Australia  a  few  years  ago,  I  met  a  remarkable  man  ① － －
(C) (B) (D)
named John Walton. He has since become a close friend. He  ② － －
(C) (D) (B)
told me that when he started out in life he seemed to be  ③ － －
(D) (B) (C)
caught in a peculiar failure pattern. Whatever he tried would  ④ － －
(D) (C) (B)
start out well and then end up badly. As a schoolboy he  ⑤ － －
dropped out of several schools for this reason. He became 
convinced  that  it  was  his  destiny  in  life  to  make  good 
beginnings and then watch them fade away. 
(B) 44. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The speaker also said, “Most of you are letting the fear of  ① Stir Your Sleeping Creativity!
failure hold you back. All the ingredients of success are right  The Cycle of Success and Failure
②
there inside you, if you’ll just turn your thinking around.  Failure: A Stepping Stone to Success
③
Don’t keep telling yourself you can’t do this or you can’t do  Be Positive and Success Will Embrace You
④
that. You can do ANYTHING if you think you can!” John  Career Development: Investment for Your Life
⑤
had  never  heard  anything  like  this  in  his  whole  life.  He 
realized for the first time that his image of himself as a 
person who started well and then faded away was all in his 
head, a state of mind that could be altered any time he made 
a firm decision to alter it. 45. 윗글의 John Walton에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
(‘I’)
① 호주에서 필자 를 만났다.
(C)
② 학창 시절에 여러 학교를 그만두었다.
At one point, John got a job with the Australian division of a 
③ 유명한 미국 회사의 호주 지사에 일자리를 얻었다.
famous American company. The same dreary pattern seemed 
④ 동기 부여 강연회의 연설자로 참석하였다.
to be unfolding: He started out well, and then things began to  New South Wales
⑤ 에 있는  지사의 매니저가 되었다.
slide. This didn’t surprise him much; it was what he expected 
to happen. Then the company sent a motivational speaker out 
to give some talks to their Australian employees, and John 
was in the audience. The visitor told his listeners to visualize 
themselves moving up in the company, receiving promotions, 
gaining energy as they went, right up to the very top.
(D)
John went back to work with tremendous enthusiasm and 
confidence and energy. He received promotions. He became 
the manager of a branch in New South Wales. Finally he 
became the head of the company for all of Australia. Where 
once he had been dogged by failure, now everything he did 
was crowned by success. He told me, “It was that one talk 
that changed my self-image by giving it a little twist. It made 
me see myself differently, and so I was different.”
*  확인 사항
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
5. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터  22번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 
①  진공청소기를 광고하려고
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
②  청소 대행업체를 소개하려고
③  전자 제품 매장을 홍보하려고
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
④  층간 소음 줄이기를 부탁하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오.
⑤  청소기 작동 방법을 설명하려고
Well, I wish I were there.
① 
Sure. I took many pictures.
②  6. 다음을  듣고,  여자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 
Right, he’s the best athlete.
③  고르시오.
No, let’s go see the game.
④ 
①  겨울 채소 재배 방법
Yeah, we got 46 in total.
⑤ 
②  옥상 정원이 주는 혜택
③  도심 공원 조성의 필요성
④  전원생활이 여유로운 이유
⑤  채식이 건강에 미치는 영향
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
You’ll miss him, too.
① 
고르시오.
I’ll join his farewell party.
② 
I’ll pick him up at the airport. ①  여가 시간 활용법 ②  재택근무의 장점 
③ 
He’s going to Canada to study. ③  교통 체증의 원인 ④  에너지 절약의 중요성
④ 
⑤  업무 스트레스 해소법
He’s living in my neighborhood.
⑤ 
8. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  전자 제품 가격이 지나치게 상승하고 있다.
3. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
②  전자 제품 폐기물 문제가 심각해지고 있다.
적절한 것을 고르시오.
③  전자 제품 사용법이 점점 더 복잡해지고 있다.
Sure. You’ll love the activity you’ve signed up for.
①  ④  에너지 효율이 높은 전자 제품 사용이 중요하다.
②  Don’t worry. You’ll make a lot of friends. ⑤  사용자 의견을 반영한 전자 제품 개발이 필요하다.
Good. You should stop your bad habits.
③ 
④  You’re right. My schedule isn’t always full. 9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
Okay. Let me explain the activities one by one.
⑤ 
①  교사－학생 ②  감독－배우 ③  점원－고객
④  코치－선수 ⑤  화가－모델
4. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 ABC  Navigation  Service  Center의  10. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
위치를 고르시오. 고르시오.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
11. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을  18. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
고르시오.  적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
①  점심 사다 주기 ②  식당 함께 가기
③  사진 찍어 주기 ④  잡지 구매하기
That’s right. I really like my art teacher.
① 
⑤  기사 작성하기
You’re right. I’ll talk to her right now.
② 
I don’t like people who are late.
③ 
I’m sorry that I couldn’t help you.
④ 
12. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
I feel better because I already apologized.
⑤ 
고르시오.
①  병원에 동행하기 ②  회의록 작성하기 
19. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
③  보고서 나누어 주기 ④  상사에게 전화하기
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
⑤  회의 장소 정리하기
Man:
I’m sure you’ll enjoy reading the book, too. 
① 
Okay. I’m going to make a list of my own. 
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 언급한 면접 응시자의 문제점을 고르시오.  ② 
I agree. It’s really difficult to reach the goal. 
③ 
①  관련 업무 경험 부족 ②  단정하지 못한 옷차림
Don’t give up, and you can fulfill your dreams.
④ 
③  낮은 적성 검사 결과 ④  자기중심적 사고
Well, keeping a diary helps you to find a solution.
⑤ 
⑤  소극적인 태도
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Jane이 Tom에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 카메라를 싸게 구입한 이유를 고르시오.  것을 고르시오.
Jane: 
①  공동으로 구매해서 ②  쿠폰이 있어서
③  할인 기간이어서 ④  반품된 상품이어서 I can’t agree with you on the ticket price.
① 
⑤  진열 상품이어서 I really can’t wait to meet the fans tonight.
② 
Our concert will definitely be a big success.
③ 
The safety of the audience is our first concern.
④ 
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점] I’m pleased that many people enjoyed the concert.
⑤ 
$25 $30 $35 $40 $45
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
16. Future  Lawyers’  Internship  Program에 관한 다음 설명을  [21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.  [3점] 21. 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
①  대학교 4학년 학생은 지원 가능하다.
①  공공장소 예절을 교육하려고
②  지원자는 법학 전공자이어야 한다.
②  비행기 탑승 절차를 안내하려고
③  영어 실력이 좋은 지원자가 유리하다.
③  한국의 관광 명소를 소개하려고
④  지원 가능 연령에 제한이 있다.
④  제주도의 날씨 변화를 설명하려고
⑤  지원 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
⑤  수학여행 시 주의사항을 전달하려고
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택한 여행 상품을  22. 기내 반입 금지 물건으로 언급되지 않은  것은?
고르시오.
① 칼 ② 가위 ③ 손톱깎이
④ 장난감 총 ⑤  헤어스프레이
①
②
③
④   이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의 
⑤ 지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
23. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Lone  animals  rely  on  their  own  senses  to  defend 
themselves,  but  an  animal  in  a  group  benefits  by  having 
Hi, boys and girls! a  lot  of  other  animals’  eyes,  ears,  and  noses  on  the  alert 
for  danger.  An  animal  in  a  group  also  has  a  smaller 
My name is Adam Burke. Are you interested in buying 
chance  of  being  the  unlucky  individual  picked  out  by  a 
a  special  lunch  bag  to  protect  our  environment? 
predator.  In  addition,  a  group  of  animals  fleeing  from  a 
When  I  was  in  sixth  grade,  I  noticed  that  many  of 
predator  can  create  confusion.  This  makes  it  harder  for  a 
my  classmates  carried  paper  lunch  bags.  I  found  out 
predator  to  focus  on  one  animal  to  catch.  A  school  of 
that  from  sandwich  wrappers  to  disposable  drink 
fish  will  split  in  two  to  avoid  a  predator  and  then 
containers, the average school kid generates 65 pounds 
quickly  regroup  behind  it.  A  herd  of  zebras  can  become 
of  lunch  bag  waste  every  year.  To  help  kids  cut 
a  dazzling  display  of  black  and  white  stripes,  making  it 
down on lunch bag waste, I have invented a reusable 
more difficult for a lion to see where one zebra ends and 
lunch bag, which I am now selling on my website. It 
another begins.
has  handles  and  a  front  pocket.  And  the  fabric  is 
partially made from recycled plastic bottles. You will 
①  군집 생활이 동물의 생존에 주는 이점
like it because you can fold it up and put it in your 
②  홀로 사는 동물의 다양한 사냥 방식
backpack.  If  you’d  like  to  buy  one,  please  feel  free 
③  동물과 인간의 거주 방식 차이
to visit www.myblog.com/aburke.
④  어류와 포유류의 복잡한 먹이 사슬
⑤  동물들의 경이로운 서식지 적응 능력
①  다양한 종류의 책가방을 소개하려고
②  음식물 쓰레기의 심각성을 경고하려고
③  유기농 점심 도시락 메뉴를 권장하려고
④  불우 이웃을 위한 무료 점심 봉사를 제안하려고
⑤  환경보호를 위한 도시락 가방 판매를 홍보하려고
24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 26. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
When  people  expect  to  see  someone  again,  they  are  If  you  are  trying  to  decide  among  a  few  people  to  fill 
more likely to find that person attractive, regardless of the  a  position,  take  a  look  at  their  writing  skills.  It  doesn’t 
individual’s behavior, than if they do not have expectations  matter  if  that  person  is  a  marketer,  salesperson,  designer, 
of  future  interaction.  The  expectation  of  future  interaction  programmer, or whatever; their writing skills will pay off. 
motivates people to look for positive qualities in someone  That’s  because  being  a  good  writer  is  about  more  than 
so that they will look forward to future interactions rather  writing.  Clear  writing  is  a  sign  of  clear  thinking.  Good 
than  dread  them,  and  increases  the  chances  that  people  writers  know  how  to  communicate.  They  make  things 
will find the individual attractive. Conversely, when people  easy  to  understand.  They  can  put  themselves  in  someone 
interact  with  someone  whom  they  do  not  foresee  meeting  else’s  shoes.  They  know  what  to  omit.  And  those  are 
again,  they  have  little  reason  to  search  for  positive  qualities  you  want  in  any  candidate.  Writing  is  making  a 
qualities.  In  fact,  doing  so  may  be  depressing,  given  that  comeback  all  over  our  society.  Look  at  how  much 
they  may  not  have  the  opportunity  to  get  to  know  the  communication  happens  through  instant  messaging  and 
person  better  in  future  interactions.  Indeed,  people  are  blogging.  Writing  is  today’s  currency  for  good  ideas. 
sometimes  motivated  to  find  negative  qualities  in  Thus, it is essential to welcome people with good writing 
individuals whom they do not expect to see again. skills into your company.
Hire Good Writers
① 다시 만날 가능성 여부가 상대방을 평가하는 데 영향을 준다. ① 
Writing and E-Commerce
② 바라는 것이 많을수록 상대방에 대한 단점을 발견하기 쉽다. ② 
③ 상대방을 배려하는 자세가 원만한 대인 관계를 가능케 한다. ③  Think Clearly vs. Write Clearly
④ 타인에 대한 평가 기준으로 성격이 외모보다 우선시된다. How to Become Great Designers
④ 
⑤ 첫인상은 상대방과의 향후 관계를 예측하는 기준이 된다. Blogging: A New Style of Communication
⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
(A), (B), (C)
27. 의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장  29. 자원 봉사자 모집에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
적절한 것은?  [3점] 않는  것은?
You cannot fit objects (A) that/what occupied a 5,000- 
square-foot  house  in  a  2,000-square-foot  condominium.  If 
GHANA NETWORK OF VOLUNTEER SERVICE
you  are  moving  to  a  smaller  condominium,  that’s  great. 
Website: www.geocities.com/service_gnvs
Get  rid  of  your  belongings  and  (B) buy/buying  the 
Contact: Emmanuel Odonkor Corletey
condominium.  It  is  fruitless  to  look  at  condominiums 
(eodonkor@hice.com)
when  you  have  spent  the  past  20-odd  years  in  a  large 
house  and  then  try  to  move  all  of  your  life  into  the 
smaller  investment.  To  do  so  often  leads  to  frustration 
because  what  you  wind  up  purchasing  is  an  expensive 
warehouse  for  your  furniture,  and  that  is  usually  the 
wrong  investment.  If  you  want  to  change  your  lifestyle, 
you  must  accept  the  consequences  of  that  decision. 
Throwing things out only (C) hurt/hurts for a little while.
(A) (B) (C)
that buy hurt
① …… ……
that buy hurts
② …… …… The Ghana Network of Volunteer Service is looking 
what buy hurts
③ …… …… for volunteers who are open-minded, sociable, and 
what buying hurts
④ …… …… committed.
what buying hurt
⑤ …… ……
Starting Months: March and September
?
Duration of Service: 8 12 weeks
? －
Age: 20 35
? －
Activities: Administration, Teaching, Translating
?
When to Apply: Throughout the year
?
Costs: $200 for the first month and $150 for each 
?
following  month  per  person.  This  covers 
accommodations and three meals a day.
Qualifications: Volunteers must be good at using 
?
computers. 
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은  것은?  [3점] ①  자원 봉사 활동을 시작하는 달은 3월과 9월이다.
Occasionally,  there  are  children  who  have  trouble  8 12
②  자원 봉사 활동 기간은  주에서  주까지이다.
understanding that their clothing choice is inappropriate or 
③  교육과 번역은 자원 봉사 활동에서 제외된다.
even  unhealthy.  Some  children follow  the  suggestion  200
① ④  첫 달 숙식 비용은 개인당  달러이다.
that sandals may not be the best option for a snowy day. 
⑤  자원 봉사자들은 컴퓨터 사용에 능숙해야 한다.
For  those  kids, experience  may  be  the  best  teacher. 
②
For  example,  when  Lydia  was  eight  years  old,  she 
insisted  on  wearing  her  favorite  sandals  to  school  despite 
warnings  that  the  sidewalks  were  covered  in  snow  and 
③
slush.  Her  mom worried  that  she  would  arrive  at 
④
school  with  cold,  wet  feet,  but  Lydia  would  not  change 
her  mind.  Of  course,  her  mother  was  right.  While  Lydia 
did  have  some  very  uncomfortable  toes  because  they 
became  soaked  and  frozen  on  her  way  to  and  from 
school,  she  learned  that  sometimes  fashion  isn’t worth 
⑤
the price of serious discomfort.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
Kids in the Kitchen Campus Court
30. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는  31.   아파트에 관한 다음 광고의 내용과 일치하지 
것은? 않는  것은?
Kids in the Kitchen Campus Court at North Walnut
2036 North Walnut Street, Appleville, TX 22345
Come  visit  the  new  Campus  Court  at  North  Walnut! 
Choose  from  our  new  one-bedroom  or  two-bedroom 
apartments: 
Great location for shopping and dining
?
Fully equipped kitchen with all electric appliances
?
Washer and dryer in all apartments
?
24-hour recreation center (except public holidays)
?
LOCATION
Kids in the Kitchen is a half-day camp for children. 
Located near the university stadium on the northwest 
side  of  the  campus.  Two  convenient  entrances,  one 
Children will learn how to use a number of kitchen 
?
from  Oxford  Avenue  and  the  other  from  North 
tools. 
Walnut Street.
They  can  explore  everything  from  planning  to 
?
presentation of their favorite foods. 
OFFICE HOURS
They  can  also  take  the  food  home  and  share  with 
? Monday Friday: 9 a.m. 6 p.m.
－ －
the entire family!
Saturday: 11 a.m. 3 p.m.
－
Sunday: Closed
INSTRUCTOR: James Smith
DATES: July 22 26
－
FEE: $75.00 (additional charge for materials: $30.00)
SCHEDULE:
TIME AGE
Morning Camp 9:00 a.m. 12:00 noon 5 to 7 years old
－
Afternoon Camp 1:00 p.m. 4:00 p.m.  8 to 10 years old
－
This  camp  is  not  recommended  for  children  with 
※
food allergies. 
①  참가하는 어린이들은 주방 용구 사용법을 배우지 않는다. ①  쇼핑을 하기 좋은 곳에 위치해 있다. 
②  참가하는 어린이들은 음식을 집으로 가져가지 못한다. ②  주방에 전기 기구가 완비되어 있다. 
30
③  수강료에 재료비  달러가 포함되어 있다.  ③  레크리에이션 센터는 공휴일에도 이용 가능하다. 
7
④ 오후 캠프는  세 이하 어린이들을 대상으로 한다.  ④  캠퍼스 북서쪽에 있는 대학 경기장 근처에 있다. 
3
⑤ 음식 알레르기가 있는 어린이들의 캠프 참가를 권장하지 않는다. ⑤  사무실의 토요일 업무 마감 시간은 오후  시이다.
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? [34～36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
34. Do  you  remember  the  childlike  joy  you  felt  the  last 
time  you  found  a  parking  spot  at  the  mall  on  a  crowded 
day?  When  you  finished  shopping,  you  may  have  left  the 
spot  with  a  certain  hesitation,  particularly  if  someone  else 
was  waiting  for  it.  Studies  have  shown  that  people  take 
longer  to  leave  a  parking  spot  when  another  driver  is 
waiting,  even  though  they  predict  they  will  not.  It’s  as  if 
the  space  suddenly  becomes  more  valuable  once  another 
person wants it. Strictly speaking, it is no longer valuable 
to  the  person  leaving  it.  After  all,  it  seems  that  our 
The above graph shows the percentage of women in wage 
brains  are  so that  once  we  have 
employment in the non-agricultural sector in 1990 and 2006.
been given something, we are hesitant to give it up. 
In  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  women’s  waged  [3점]
①
non-agricultural  employment  increased  more  than  five  sensitive to loss
① 
percentage points between 1990 and 2006.  In 2006, the  resistant to order
② ② 
percentage of women’s waged non-agricultural employment  receptive to new ideas
③ 
in East Asia and Pacific countries was twice as high as that  easily exposed to illness
④ 
of  South  Asia. ③In  that  same  year,  the  percentage  of  ⑤  reluctant to deal with time
women’s waged non-agricultural employment in the Middle 
East  and  North  Africa  was  less  than  that  of  Sub-Saharan 
Africa by ten percentage points. Despite the improvement 
④
between  1990  and  2006,  South  Asia  showed  the  smallest 
increase in the percentage of women in waged non-agricultural 
employment.  Between 1990 and 2006, the increase in the 
⑤
percentage of women’s waged non-agricultural employment 
in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  was  larger  than  that  of  the  Middle 
East and North Africa.
33. 다음 글에 드러난 Kate의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? 35. Wood  is  a  material  that  is  widely  acknowledged  to  be 
environmentally  friendly.  It  has  been  welcome  as  an 
Kate  ran  to  the  mailbox  as  soon  as  the  mail  truck 
alternative  material  for  a  long  time  in  building  houses 
drove  away.  She  opened  the  mailbox  and  reached  into 
instead  of  cement  or  bricks.  However,  it  is  not  always 
the  dark  space.  Her  hope  quickly  disappeared,  however. 
easy  to of  one  particular 
There  was  nothing  addressed  to  her.  It  was  her  sixteenth     
material such as wood over another. Many species of tree 
birthday  today,  but  there  wasn’t  even  a  birthday  card 
are  now  endangered,  including  mahogany  and  teak,  and 
from  her  father.  “I  didn’t  get  anything  from  Dad,”  said 
deforestation,  particularly  in tropical rainforests, has had a 
Kate  to  her  mother.  “I  can’t  believe  he  forgot  my 
severe  impact  both  on  local  communities  and  on  native 
birthday.”  Kate’s  father  was  a  doctor,  and  every  summer 
plants  and  wildlife.  Where  wood  is  harvested  and  then 
he  went  to  Africa  to  treat  people  who  were  too  poor  to 
transported halfway across the globe, the associated energy 
go  to  a  hospital.  “Well,  he  didn’t  forget  your  birthday, 
costs  are  high,  causing  a  negative  impact  on  the 
Kate.  I  was  going  to  give  this  to  you  at  your  birthday 
environment.  What  is  more,  where  wood  is  treated  with 
party  this  afternoon,”  said  her  mother,  giving  her  a  small 
chemicals to improve fire- and pest-resistance, its healthful 
pink box with a purple ribbon, which arrived from Africa 
properties are compromised. 
the  day  before.  “Yeah,  I  knew  Dad  wouldn’t  let  me  [3점]
down!” shouted Kate, smiling the sweetest smile. *mahogany: ( )
마호가니 적갈색 열대산 목재
①  scared → relieved  ①  increase the inherent resistance
②  cheerful → terrified ②  favor the chemical properties
③  indifferent → ashamed ③  dominate the natural habitats
④  dissatisfied → confused ④  evaluate the relative merits
⑤  disappointed → delighted ⑤  deny the cost advantage
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
36. Human  farmers  and  their  domesticated  plants  and  39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 
animals  made  a  grand  bargain,  though  the  farmers  did  not 
곳은?  [3점]
realize it at the time. Consider maize. Domestication made 
To create a unifying theme for the many crowd scenes, 
it dependent on man. But its association with humans also 
he  invented  a  character  of  a  backpacking  tourist  who 
carried  maize  far  beyond  its  origins  as  a  little-known 
Mexican  grass,  so  that  it  is  now  one  of  the  most  widely  would appear in each location.
planted  crops  on  earth.  From  mankind’s  point  of  view, 
In  1986,  Martin  Handford,  a  young  British  commercial 
meanwhile,  the  domestication  of  maize  made  available  an 
abundant new source of food. But its cultivation (like that  artist  who  specialized  in  drawing  cartoon  scenes  for 
of  other  plants)  prompted  people  to  adopt  a  new  lifestyle  clients,  had  the  idea  of  publishing  his  illustrations  in 
based  on  farming.  Is  man  taking  advantage  of  maize  for  book  form.  ( )  His  idea  was  to  depict  humorous 
①
his  own  purposes,  or  is  maize  taking  advantage  of  man?  crowd  scenes  in  various  locations,  including  a  beach,  a 
Domestication, it seems, is  .  [3점] train  station,  and  a  country  fair.  ( ② )  In  the  original 
*maize: 옥수수 British  editions  of  the  book,  the  character’s  name  was 
Wally. ( ) He went on to publish seven more Where’s 
a pain in the neck an unfair sacrifice ③
①  ② 
Wally  books,  create  a  television  show, and license several 
a two-way street a request for help
③  ④ 
⑤  a zero-sum game video  games.  ( ④ )  Although  the  fad  for  his  character 
declined in the late 1990s, there is still occasional talk of 
(A), (B) a  Wally  movie.  ( )  Wally  is  licensed  in  at  least  17 
37. 다음 글의 빈칸  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? ⑤
countries, where he looks pretty much the same but often 
Pride is a sense that I am better than others, I have the 
goes by different names.
ultimate beauty, talent, and answers, and I alone should rule 
the world. Pride causes individuals to be out of touch with 
*fad: 일시적 유행(열광)
the reality of who they truly are and of what really brings 
happiness.  Pride  prevents  individuals  from  experiencing 
their  true  value  or  the  true  value  of  others.  A  sense  of 
self-worth, (A) , provides calmness and enjoyment 
when dealing with all kinds of individuals. When individuals 
have a true sense of self-worth, they do not need to compare 
themselves with others, to tear others apart or feel superior. 
(B) ,  there  is  an  experience  of  oneness  and  40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
sharing.  By  recognizing  where  one’s  true  value  lies,  one 
Most of the words we use and the meanings we think 
simultaneously recognizes the true value of others.
about are a combination of simpler ideas.
(A) (B)
(A) Some of them are specialized for sitting at certain high 
on the other hand Instead
① ……
places,  like  bar  stools.  If  you  learned  about  a  culture 
on the other hand Unfortunately
② ……
in which a certain type of chair was used only for the 
for example Moreover
③ ……
purpose of sitting while waiting for a bus, you might 
for example Instead
④ ……
think  this  is  odd  but  would  have  no  difficulty 
in addition Unfortunately
⑤ ……
understanding it. 
(B) Consider  a  chair.  Before  you  can  have  an  idea  of  a 
38. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
chair,  you  need  to  understand  that  there  exist  in  the 
Power walking is a type of exercise that nearly anyone can 
world certain functional objects. Some of these objects 
do. Many people enjoy this form of exercise because it 
①
support human activity, in this case, sitting. 
can be done outdoors in fresh air where the scenery can be 
changed by altering the course of the walk. Alternatively, 
② (C) The combination of the concepts chair and waiting for 
the  exercise  may  be  done  indoors,  in  a  climate-controlled 
bus  allows  you  to  create  the  new  complex  concept 
environment,  on  a  treadmill. People  should  start  with  a 
③ chair used while waiting for bus. But the basic concept 
short  distance  on  flat  ground  and  gradually  increase  the 
of chair is built out of the simpler ideas that we take 
distance and intensity. Instruct people to sit on the bench and 
④
for granted: object, furniture, sitting.
to start reading their newspapers carefully. While power 
⑤
walking, people should wear shoes with a good arch support  (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － －   ②  － －
to avoid injury and wear clothes appropriate for the climate.  (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  － － ④  － －
*treadmill: 회전식 벨트 위를 달리는 운동 기구 ⑤  (C)－(B)－(A)
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Looking  at  the  kids  around  her,  Janet  yelled  as  loudly 
Effective  communication  is  vital  to  achieving  wellness 
as  (b)she  could,  “Rick  and  Matt,  get  Mr.  Grey  on  that 
because  our  daily  interactions  with  others  are  important 
cart  and  roll  him  over  here!  Everyone  else,  grab  the 
factors  in  our  emotional  health.  People  who  have 
music  stands  and  bring  them  next  to  the  piano.  Hurry!” 
developed  a  high  degree  of  communication  skills  are 
When  everyone  came  back,  Janet  asked  five  of  them  to 
more  likely  to  have  the  potential  for  deeper  bonds  in 
follow.  They  ran  to  where  the  curtain  hung  along  the 
their  personal  relationships  than  non-communicators. 
wall of the stage.
Perhaps  the  greatest  communication  satisfaction  comes 
from  our  close  relationships,  which  are  the  main  source 
(C)
of our emotional health. Close relationships develop when 
Janet  grabbed  the  edge  of  the  curtain  and  screamed, 
two  people  can  exchange  emotional  messages  easily  and 
“Everyone,  grab  hold  and  pull!”  When  the  curtain  fell, 
effectively.  Whether  we  develop  effective  communication 
they  pulled  it  over  the  tops  of  the  music  stands  and  the 
skills that promote healthy interactions depends largely on 
grand  piano.  Then,  (c)she  motioned  everyone  to  get 
how  we  learn  to  communicate.  For  example,  interaction 
under  the  curtain.  The  wind  noise  rose  again,  but  Janet 
between  parents  and  their  children  is  often  important  in 
was  now  safely  hidden  inside  the  piano  and  curtain  fort 
determining  whether  a  child  is  shy  or  unafraid  of 
with  the  rest  of  the  orchestra.  Relieved,  they  thanked 
interaction.  Good  parents  listen  to  their  children  and 
one another and felt oneness in their hearts.
allow  them  to  talk  about  their  fears  and  unhappiness. 
Children  raised  in  households  that    *fort: 요새
communication find it easier to talk to others about their 
(D)
disappointments,  fears,  frustrations,  and  other  emotions 
later  in  life.  Such  individuals  find  that  they  ultimately 
Kids  were  shocked  to  see  Mr.  Grey  fall  down,  and 
have better emotional health.
they  began  screaming.  Nikki  put  (d)her  mouth  next  to 
Janet’s ear and yelled, “We need help!” Janet was scared 
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?  too,  but  she  fought  the  fear.  Janet  pulled  Nikki  and  ran 
over  to  the  grand  piano.  She  grabbed  the  whistle  out  of 
Problems with School Life
① 
her  bag  and  blew  it  hard  three  times.  Every  kid  on  the 
Ways to Succeed in Business
② 
stage  turned  to  look  at  Janet.  In  three  seconds,  all  kids 
Interaction: A Source of Information
③ 
were gathered around (e)her.
Communication: A Key to Emotional Health
④ 
How to Express Our Fears and Unhappiness
⑤
(A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
가장 적절한 것은? 
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
(B) (C) (D) (C) (B) (D)
neglect classify ①  － － ②  － －
①  ② 
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
foster discourage ③  － － ④  － －
③  ④ 
(D) (C) (B)
investigate ⑤  － －
⑤ 
(a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Janet
45. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
(A)
①  가장 나이가 많은 아이였다.
The  school  orchestra  was  practicing  in  the  auditorium, 
②  다섯 아이들과 함께 커튼 쪽으로 기어갔다.
and  Mr.  Grey  was  clapping  his  hands  to  mark  the 
③  아이들에게 커튼을 잡아당기라고 외쳤다.
rhythm  when  he  heard  the  town  emergency  siren.  “Stop! 
④  무서웠지만,  두려움과 싸웠다.
Everyone!”  he  shouted.  Then,  he  ran  to  the  door  and 
⑤  가방에서 호루라기를 꺼내 세 번 불었다. 
pushed  it  open.  But  a  burst  of  wind  slammed  the  door 
right back, and it hit him hard. He fell down and didn’t 
*  확인 사항
move.  Janet  was  the  oldest  kid.  And  (a)she  knew 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
instantly. This was a tornado.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터  22번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 
①  여가 시간 활용법
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
②  재택근무의 장점
③  교통 체증의 원인
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
④  에너지 절약의 중요성
적절한 것을 고르시오.
⑤  업무 스트레스 해소법
Sure. You’ll love the activity you’ve signed up for.
① 
Don’t worry. You’ll make a lot of friends.
② 
Good. You should stop your bad habits.
③ 
④  You’re right. My schedule isn’t always full. 7. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Okay. Let me explain the activities one by one.
⑤ 
①  전자 제품 가격이 지나치게 상승하고 있다.
②  전자 제품 폐기물 문제가 심각해지고 있다.
③  전자 제품 사용법이 점점 더 복잡해지고 있다.
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
④  에너지 효율이 높은 전자 제품 사용이 중요하다.
적절한 것을 고르시오.
⑤  사용자 의견을 반영한 전자 제품 개발이 필요하다.
That was the best coffee I’ve ever tasted.
① 
I’ve been standing in line for 20 minutes.
② 
No wonder this place is crowded with people.
③ 
That’s because I already bought a coffee maker.
④  8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
Be careful not to burn your mouth with the coffee.
⑤ 
①  교사－학생 ②  감독－배우
③  점원－고객 ④  코치－선수
3. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ⑤  화가－모델
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sure. What’s the best tourist attraction to visit?
① 
How much money should I budget for souvenirs?
② 
9. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
Yeah, you’re right. It’s better to be safe than sorry.
③ 
고르시오.
I know. I need to check the weight of my luggage.
④ 
No. The insurance doesn’t cover this emergency case.
⑤ 
4. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
①  진공청소기를 광고하려고
②  청소 대행업체를 소개하려고
③  전자 제품 매장을 홍보하려고
④  층간 소음 줄이기를 부탁하려고
⑤  청소기 작동 방법을 설명하려고
5. 다음을  듣고,  여자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 
고르시오.
10. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
①  사과가 건강에 좋은 이유
고르시오.
②  규칙적인 식습관의 중요성
③  과일을 통한 노화 예방책 ①  점심 사다 주기  ②  식당 함께 가기
④  신선한 사과 선별 기준 ③  사진 찍어 주기 ④  잡지 구매하기
⑤  효과적인 사과 보관법 ⑤  기사 작성하기 
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
11. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을  18. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
고르시오. 적절한 것을 고르시오.
to buy some drinks for the meeting Man:
① 
to borrow the printer from the sales department
②  I’m sure you’ll enjoy reading the book, too. 
① 
to print out the new contract at the Internet Cafe
③  Okay. I’m going to make a list of my own. 
② 
to set up the new schedule for the meeting
④  I agree. It’s really difficult to reach the goal. 
③ 
to make a phone call to the repairperson
⑤  Don’t give up, and you can fulfill your dreams.
④ 
Well, keeping a diary helps you to find a solution.
⑤ 
12. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 카메라를 싸게 구입한 이유를 고르시오.
19. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
①  공동으로 구매해서 ②  쿠폰이 있어서
적절한 것을 고르시오.
③  할인 기간이어서  ④  반품된 상품이어서
⑤  진열 상품이어서 Woman:
Everything will be over before you even realize it.
①
13. 대화를 듣고,  자동차 렌트 시 고려할 사항으로 두 사람이 
It seems you’ve adapted to your surroundings well.
②
언급하지 않은  것을 고르시오.
Sounds like you’re taking on more than you can handle.
③
①  자동차 크기 ②  연료 소비량 Cramming all night will distract you from your tasks.
④
③  도로 상태 ④  자동차 보험 Scratching the surface will never accomplish the goal.
⑤
⑤  렌트 기간
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Jane이 Tom에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
것을 고르시오.
① $27 ② $36 ③ $40 ④ $45 ⑤ $54 Jane: 
I can’t agree with you on the ticket price.
① 
Future  Lawyers’  Internship  Program
15. 에 관한 다음 설명을  I really can’t wait to meet the fans tonight.
② 
듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오. Our concert will definitely be a big success.
③ 
4 The safety of the audience is our first concern.
①  대학교  학년 학생은 지원 가능하다. ④ 
I’m pleased that many people enjoyed the concert.
②  지원자는 법학 전공자이어야 한다. ⑤ 
③  영어 실력이 좋은 지원자가 유리하다.
④  지원 가능 연령에 제한이 있다.
⑤  지원 마감일은 이번 주 금요일이다.
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
Tasmanian  tiger
16. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는 
21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
것을 고르시오.  [3점]
effects of air pollution on farming
① 
4,000
①  약  년 전까지 호주 대륙에 살았었다.  ways to promote local fruit farming
② 
②  등에 검은 줄무늬가 있었다. 
problems caused by food transportation
③ 
③  위장은 한 번에 많은 먹이를 먹을 수 있도록 늘어났다.
origins of various agricultural produce
④ 
Tasmania 
④  들개와의 경쟁에서 져서  섬에서 멸종되었다.
the change in food production patterns
⑤ 
⑤  양을 키우는 농부에 의해서 사냥을 당했다.
22. 식품으로 언급되지 않은  것은?
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택한 여행 상품을 
tomatoes kiwi fruits
①  ② 
고르시오.
bananas apples
③  ④ 
lettuce
⑤ 
①
②
③
④   이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의 
⑤ 지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
When  people  expect  to  see  someone  again,  they  are  Artists  create  artistic  works  to  get  viewers  to  have 
more likely to find that person attractive, regardless of the  certain  kinds  of  experiences.  But  the  intention  to  convey 
individual’s behavior, than if they do not have expectations  certain  experiences  to  viewers  is  sometimes  secondary  to 
of  future  interaction.  The  expectation  of  future  interaction  the  intention  to  express  the  artistic  imagination  creatively. 
motivates people to look for positive qualities in someone  Consider  actions  generally  for  the  moment.  Think,  for 
so that they will look forward to future interactions rather  example,  of  people  watching  their  favorite  sporting  team. 
than  dread  them,  and  increases  the  chances  that  people  Whether  it  is  at  an  actual  match  or  in  a  bar,  at  crucial 
will find the individual attractive. Conversely, when people  periods  in  a  game  people  tend  to  make  gestures  in 
interact  with  someone  whom  they  do  not  foresee  meeting  anticipation  or  cheer  in  exhortation.  They  often  want  to 
again,  they  have  little  reason  to  search  for  positive  convey  their  sense  of  urgency  to  the  team,  or  people  at 
qualities.  In  fact,  doing  so  may  be  depressing,  given  that  the  bar  may  want  to  show  their  disgust  to  others  in  the 
they  may  not  have  the  opportunity  to  get  to  know  the  crowd.  But  they  often  express  themselves  in  this  manner 
person  better  in  future  interactions.  Indeed,  people  are  without  any  thought  for  what  others  think  or  how  they 
sometimes  motivated  to  find  negative  qualities  in  may  respond.  Actions  we  perform  through  which  we 
individuals whom they do not expect to see again. intend  to  express  our  feelings,  thoughts,  and  attitudes 
need  not  have  any  communicative  intent  for  how  others 
① 다시 만날 가능성 여부가 상대방을 평가하는 데 영향을 준다.
may  respond.  At  least  some  works  should  be  understood 
② 바라는 것이 많을수록 상대방에 대한 단점을 발견하기 쉽다.
as the representation of just this kind of action.
③ 상대방을 배려하는 자세가 원만한 대인 관계를 가능케 한다.
④ 타인에 대한 평가 기준으로 성격이 외모보다 우선시된다. *exhortation: 권고, 충고
⑤ 첫인상은 상대방과의 향후 관계를 예측하는 기준이 된다. Artistic Act: To Express Rather than to Communicate
①
Artistic Masterpieces: Products of Viewers’ Desires
②
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Artistic Works Beyond Artists’ Imagination
③
Even  when  scientists  are  able  to  identify  seemingly 
Artworks Not for Artists but for Viewers
④
beneficial  nutrients,  they  cannot  always  understand  how 
Sports: A Tool for Expressing Oneself?
⑤
those  nutrients  will  operate  in  a  real-life  context,  in  the 
course of our daily meals. Fruits and vegetables are believed 
to help prevent cancer. Scientists have believed that it is the 
antioxidants  in  these  foods  that  make  the  difference
―
compounds like beta carotene, lycopene, and vitamin E. Yet 
when  these  molecules  were  extracted  from  fruits  and 
vegetables and made into supplements, they did not reduce 
cancer. The beta carotene supplement actually increased the 
risk of certain cancers. In other words, scientists thoroughly  her[She]
26. 밑줄 친  가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
misunderstood the causes of complex events. They identified 
I  was  reminded  of  our  mission  earlier  this  year  when 
one  element  engaged  in  the  process  of  nutrition  without 
my mother sold her house. Because of my father’s failing 
fully  comprehending  how  the  system  as  a  whole  truly 
health,  my  parents  recently  moved  from  Florida  to 
functions. Nutritional scientists pursuing the hot paradigm 
―
Maryland  to  live  with  my  elder  sister  and her  family. 
①
of isolating nutrients failed to see a multitude of links in 
―
At  my  mom’s  request,  my  brothers,  sisters,  and  I  sorted 
the complex chain that leads to good health.
through  all her  belongings. She  told  us  to  keep  or 
② ③
*antioxidant: 산화 방지제 discard  whatever  we  pleased.  For  myself  I  kept  a  solitary 
problems of making nutritional supplements out of plants piece  of  china,  one  of  the  few  remaining  plates  from  the 
①
needs  for  an  alternative  scientific  method  for  isolating  set my grandfather bought my mother for her wedding. 
② ④
nutrients I  can  still  remember  the  set  in  better  days serving 
―
insufficient understanding of how nutrients work in the  many  a  guest  on  a  Sunday  afternoon.  But  its  comrades 
③
whole system have  all  been  broken  or  have  disappeared,  and  this  plate 
④ potential  benefits  of  extracting  molecules  from  fruits  is  all  I  have.  It  is  delicate  and  faded―you  can  no 
and vegetables longer  read  the  pattern  name  printed  on  the  back.  But  it 
challenge  of  finding  beneficial  nutrients  that  may  help  hangs in my dining room as a pleasant reminder of ⑤her 
⑤
hospitality.
prevent cancers
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
(A), (B), (C)
27. 의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장  29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
적절한 것은?  [3점]
It  had  long  been  something  of  a  mystery  where,  and 
on what, the northern fur seals of the eastern Pacific feed 
during the winter, (A) when/which they  spend  off  the 
coast  of  North  America  from  California  to  Alaska.  There 
is  no  evidence  that  they  are  feeding  to  any  great  extent 
on  sardines,  mackerel,  or  other  commercially  important 
fishes.  Presumably  four  million  seals  could  not  compete 
with  commercial  fishermen  for  the  same  species  without 
the  fact  (B) being/is known.  But  there  is  some  evidence 
The above graph shows the percentage of women in wage 
on  the  diet  of  the  fur  seals,  and  it  is  highly  significant. 
employment in the non-agricultural sector in 1990 and 2006.
Their  stomachs  have  yielded  the  bones  of  a  species  of 
In  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  women’s  waged 
①
fish  that  has  never  been  seen  alive.  Indeed,  not  even  its  non-agricultural  employment  increased  more  than  five 
remains (C) has/have been  found  anywhere  except  in  the  percentage points between 1990 and 2006.  In 2006, the 
②
stomachs  of  seals.  Ichthyologists  say  that  this  ‘seal  fish’  percentage of women’s waged non-agricultural employment 
belongs to a group that typically inhabits very deep water,  in East Asia and Pacific countries was twice as high as that 
of  South  Asia. In  that  same  year,  the  percentage  of 
off the edge of the continental shelf. ③
women’s waged non-agricultural employment in the Middle 
*ichthyologist: 어류학자 East  and  North  Africa  was  less  than  that  of  Sub-Saharan 
Africa by ten percentage points. Despite the improvement 
④
(A) (B) (C)
between  1990  and  2006,  South  Asia  showed  the  smallest 
when is have
① …… …… increase in the percentage of women in waged non-agricultural 
② when …… being …… have employment. ⑤Between 1990 and 2006, the increase in the 
which being have percentage of women’s waged non-agricultural employment 
③ …… ……
which being has in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  was  larger  than  that  of  the  Middle 
④ …… ……
East and North Africa.
which is has
⑤ …… ……
Zelia  Maria  Magdalena  Nuttall
30. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 
일치하지 않는  것은?
American archaeologist-ethnohistorian Zelia Maria Magdalena 
Nuttall was well known especially for her investigations of 
pre-Columbian culture and her studies of Mexican peoples 
and native Mexican plants. Nuttall was a brilliant archival 
researcher and self-trained archaeologist who very early carved 
a  career  for  herself  by  pursuing  independent  research  and 
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
publishing in scholarly journals. Before age 30 she became 
않은  것은?
a  member  of  several  highly  prestigious  scientific  societies 
Occasionally,  there  are  children  who  have  trouble 
on  the  basis  of  her  work.  She  was  the  winner  of  three 
understanding that their clothing choice is inappropriate or 
medals for the exhibits of the results of her archival work 
even  unhealthy.  Some  children follow  the  suggestion 
① and archaeological research, which she presented in Europe 
that sandals may not be the best option for a snowy day.  and the United States. Nuttall was never a part of university 
For  those  kids, experience  may  be  the  best  teacher.  teaching faculty, and indeed there is no indication that she 
②
For  example,  when  Lydia  was  eight  years  old,  she  would  have  accepted  such  a  position  had  it  been  offered. 
Early in her career, she was appointed Honorary Assistant 
insisted  on  wearing  her  favorite  sandals  to  school  despite 
in  Mexican  Archaeology  at  the  Peabody  Museum  of 
warnings  that  the  sidewalks  were  covered  in  snow  and 
③
Harvard University, a post she held for forty-seven years.
slush.  Her  mom worried  that  she  would  arrive  at 
④
archival:
school  with  cold,  wet  feet,  but  Lydia  would  not  change  * 기록의
her  mind.  Of  course,  her  mother  was  right.  While  Lydia 
① 멕시코의 토종 식물에 관한 연구로 잘 알려졌다. 
did  have  some  very  uncomfortable  toes  because  they 
② 독자적인 연구와 학술지 논문 발표를 통해 경력을 쌓았다.
became  soaked  and  frozen  on  her  way  to  and  from  30
③ 세가 되기 전에 권위 있는 여러 학회의 회원이 되었다.
school,  she  learned  that  sometimes  fashion  isn’t worth 
⑤ ④ 기록 작업과 고고학 연구의 결과물 전시로 세 개의 메달을 받았다.
the price of serious discomfort. Harvard 47
⑤   대학의 교수로  년간 학생들을 가르쳤다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 33. People  knowingly  or  unknowingly  will  take  too  much, 
even though it is not for anyone’s collective or long-term 
31. Wood  is  a  material  that  is  widely  acknowledged  to  be 
good.  As  Hardin  put  it,  “Freedom  in  a  commons  brings 
environmentally  friendly.  It  has  been  welcome  as  an 
ruin  to  all.”  Consider  a  traffic  jam  on  a  main  road  going 
alternative  material  for  a  long  time  in  building  houses 
into  any  big  city.  Each  person  picks  that  particular  road 
instead  of  cement  or  bricks.  However,  it  is  not  always 
for  the  logical  reason  that  it’s  the  fastest  route.  In  the 
easy  to of  one  particular 
   
beginning,  each  additional  car  does  not  slow  the  traffic 
material such as wood over another. Many species of tree 
down,  as  there  is  enough  room  on  the  road  for  the 
are  now  endangered,  including  mahogany  and  teak,  and 
additional  drivers.  At  some  point,  however,  each  car 
deforestation, particularly in tropical rainforests, has had a 
reduces  the  average  speed,  and  eventually  there  are  so 
severe  impact  both  on  local  communities  and  on  native 
many  drivers  that  the  traffic  slows  to  a  crawl.  All  the 
plants  and  wildlife.  Where  wood  is  harvested  and  then 
people  seeking  to  minimize  their  own  driving  time  add 
transported halfway across the globe, the associated energy 
up  to  a  longer  commute  for  everyone.  Doing  what’s 
costs  are  high,  causing  a  negative  impact  on  the 
rational ,
environment.  What  is  more,  where  wood  is  treated  with 
including  you.  On  a  global  scale,  the  same  thing  can 
chemicals to improve fire- and pest-resistance, its healthful 
befall  environmental  issues  such  as  overfished  seas  and 
properties are compromised.
rivers, air pollution, and water scarcity. 
[3점]
*mahogany: ( )
마호가니 적갈색 열대산 목재
leads to logical consequences for all drivers
①
increase the inherent resistance
①  is compatible with the maximum benefit of each driver
②
favor the chemical properties
②  enhances unselfish interests of each and every commuter
③
dominate the natural habitats
③  is not well executed by the unexpected behaviors of some 
④
evaluate the relative merits
④  drivers
deny the cost advantage
⑤  results  in  a  negative  outcome  to  the  collective  interest 
⑤
of all drivers
34. Researchers  asked  college  student  volunteers  to  think 
through  a  fantasy  version  of  an  experience (looking 
attractive in a pair of high-heeled shoes, winning an essay 
contest, or getting an A on a test) and then evaluated the 
32. So often, we get caught up in the minutiae of our jobs fantasy’s  effect  on  the  subjects  and  on  how  things 
tedious annoyances and struggles that may be temporary 
― unfolded in reality. When participants envisioned the most 
roadblocks  but  feel  more  like  concrete  mountains.  While 
positive  outcome,  their  energy  levels,  as  measured  by 
there’s  plenty  of  research  that  shows  that  people  who 
blood pressure, dropped, and they reported having a worse 
work  with  the  muscles  above  their  neck  create  all  kinds 
experience  with  the  actual  event  than  those  who  had 
of  stresses  for  themselves,  it’s  the  people  who  focus  on 
conjured more realistic or even negative visions. To assess 
the  why  of  their  jobs  (as  opposed  to  the  what  and  the 
subjects’  real  life  experiences,  the  researchers  compared 
how)  who  can  manage  the  day-to-day  problems  more 
lists  of  goals  that  subjects  had  set  for  themselves  against 
easily.  That  is,  if  you  can  define  the  purpose  of  your 
what  they  had  actually  accomplished  and  also  relied  on 
career  or  feel  passionate  about  the  mission  of  your 
self-reports. “When we fantasize about it especially when 
―
company, you can much more easily handle the occasional 
you  fantasize  something  very  positive it’s  almost  like 
―
server maintenance that disrupts your in-box. The flip side 
you  are  actually  living  it,”  says  one  of  the  study’s 
is  that  if  you’re  working  in  any  area  (or  company)  that 
co-authors.  That ,
 
doesn’t  align  with  your  own  value,  all  the  little  stuff
  draining the incentive to “get energized to go and get it,” 
.
  she explains. Subjects may be better off imagining how to 
*minutiae: 상세, 세목, 사소한 점 surmount obstacles instead of ignoring them. [3점]
focuses on the why, belittling the what and the how   prompts you into assessing the real life as it is
①  ①
liberates you from the prison of daily routines turns a rosy dream into an actual accomplishment 
②  ②
snowballs into a big ball of daily disasters renders your goal independent of the fantasy world
③  ③
paves your way to climb up the corporate ladder tricks the mind into thinking the goal has been achieved
④  ④
illuminates the true value of what you have to do deceives your mind into believing obstacles are insurmountable
⑤  ⑤
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
35. When  confronted  by  a  seemingly  simple  pointing  task,  37. Traditionally we have assessed mathematics ability based 
where  their  desires  are  put  in  conflict  with  outcomes,  on  the  number  of  correct  answers  on  a  page  full  of 
chimpanzees  find  it  impossible  to  exhibit  subtle  self-  computational  problems.  Learning  and  memorizing  facts, 
serving  cognitive  strategies  in  the  immediate  presence  of  therefore,  was  the  key  component  to  the  mathematics 
a  desired  reward.  However,  such  tasks  are  mastered 
instructional program. Recently, (A) , many teachers 
.  In  one 
have  started  placing  a  greater  emphasis  on  mathematical 
study,  chimps  were  confronted  by  a  simple  choice;  two 
understanding,  problem  solving,  hands-on  experiences,  and 
plates  holding  tasty  food  items  were  presented,  each  with 
collaborative  work.  This  change  in  the  instructional 
a  different  number  of  treats.  If  the  chimp  pointed  to  the 
program can be attributed to well-informed teachers and the 
plate  having  more  treats,  it  would  immediately  be  given 
work of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. 
to  a  fellow  chimp  in  an  adjacent  cage,  and  the  frustrated 
Now  teachers  should  realize  that  their  students  will  be 
subject  would  receive  the  smaller  amount.  After  hundreds 
using mathematics in a world where calculators, computers, 
and  hundreds  of  trials,  these  chimps  could  not  learn  to 
and  other  forms  of  technology  are  readily  available. 
withhold  pointing  to  the  larger  reward.  However,  these 
same chimps had already been taught the symbolic concept  Therefore, the application of mathematics, rather than mere 
of simple numbers. When those numbers were placed on the  fact  acquisition,  is  what  will  be  expected  of  them  in  the 
plates  as  a  substitute  for  the  actual  rewards,  the  chimps  workplace  and  in  life,  and (B) mathematics 
   
promptly  learned  to  point  to  the  smaller  numbers  first,  instruction should mirror this real life application.
thereby obtaining the larger rewards for themselves.
  [3점]
(A) (B)
as immediate rewards replace delayed ones
①
however otherwise
when an alternative symbol system is employed ① ……
②
however nonetheless
if their desires for the larger rewards are satisfied ② ……
③
however consequently
when material rewards alternate with symbolic ones ③ ……
④
moreover accordingly
if the value of the number is proportional to the amount  ④ ……
⑤
of the reward ⑤ moreover …… similarly
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
After  making  a  choice,  the  decision  ultimately  changes 
36.
our  estimated  pleasure,  enhancing  the  expected  pleasure  38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
from  the  selected  option  and  decreasing  the  expected 
Most of the words we use and the meanings we think 
pleasure from the rejected option. If we were not inclined 
about are a combination of simpler ideas.
to (A) the  value  of  our  options  rapidly  so  that 
they concur with our choices, we would likely second-guess 
(A) Some of them are specialized for sitting at certain high 
ourselves to the point of insanity. We would ask ourselves 
places,  like  bar  stools.  If  you  learned  about  a  culture 
again  and  again  whether  we  should  have  chosen  Greece 
in which a certain type of chair was used only for the 
over Thailand, the toaster over the coffee maker, and Jenny 
purpose of sitting while waiting for a bus, you might 
over Michele. Consistently second-guessing ourselves would 
think  this  is  odd  but  would  have  no  difficulty 
interfere with our daily functioning and promote a negative 
understanding it. 
effect. We would feel anxious and confused, regretful and 
sad. Have we done the right thing? Should we change our 
(B) Consider  a  chair.  Before  you  can  have  an  idea  of  a 
mind?  These  thoughts  would  result  in  a  permanent  halt. 
chair,  you  need  to  understand  that  there  exist  in  the 
We  would  find  ourselves literally stuck,  overcome  by 
― ― world certain functional objects. Some of these objects 
(B) and  unable  to  move  forward.  On  the  other 
support human activity, in this case, sitting. 
hand, reevaluating our alternatives after making a decision 
increases our commitment to the action taken and keeps us  (C) The combination of the concepts chair and waiting for 
moving forward. bus  allows  you  to  create  the  new  complex  concept 
  [3점]
chair used while waiting for bus. But the basic concept 
(A) (B)
of chair is built out of the simpler ideas that we take 
disregard indecision
① ……
for granted: object, furniture, sitting.
disregard decision
② ……
disclose decision (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ …… ①  － －   ②  － －
update prejudice (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ …… ③  － － ④  － －
update indecision (C) (B) (A)
⑤ …… ⑤  － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은? [41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The  experimenter  then  changed  the  context  so  that  the  If  you  don’t  get  the  kind  of  information  failure 
participants had to do a subtly different task. provides,  you’ll  end  up  with  unrealistic  expectations  for 
yourself,  explains  a  psychologist.  You  could  wind  up  in 
By changing the focus or context of a task, we can get 
a position where failure, which has gathered under cover 
renewed energy even when we feel that we are completely 
of darkness, reveals itself all at once. 
out  of  energy.  To  demonstrate  this,  a  psychologist  asked 
We  should  hope,  then,  for  exposure  to  failure,  early 
people to take part in what she called ‘semi-free tasks’. The 
and  often.  The  sociologist  Glen  Elder  proposed  that 
tasks included drawing, repeatedly writing ‘ababababababab...’, 
there  is  a  sensitive  period  for  growth late  teens 
―
or  reading  a  short  poem.  ( )  The  participants  were 
① through  early  30s during  which  failures  are  most 
―
asked  to  do  these  tasks  until  they  felt  exhausted.  ( ) 
② beneficial.  Such  a  pattern  seems  to  promote  the  trait 
Those  drawing  were  asked  to  redraw  their  last  picture  to 
sometimes  called  equanimity.  We  learn  that  trauma  is 
demonstrate  how  quickly  they  could  draw.  ( )  Those 
③ survivable,  so  we  don’t  plunge  too  deeply  following 
writing ‘abab’ were asked to sign their name and address. 
setbacks.  Nor,  conversely,  do  we  soar  too  high  on  our 
( ) In this new context their fatigue disappeared. ( ) 
④ ⑤ successes.  Some  businesses  in  Silicon  Valley  and  on 
This phenomenon of creating a second wind can be seen in 
Wall  Street  make  a  point  of  hiring  ex-pro  athletes  to 
action at airports where security officers rotate around different 
their  staffs.  It’s  not  just  that  their  high  profile  draws 
stations to stop routine-induced fatigue from settling in.
business.  It’s  because  athletes  are  good  at  recovering 
from  their  failures.  “We  needed  people  who  could 
(A) perform  and  not  get  emotionally  attached  to  losses,”  a 
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
Chicago  oil  trader  told  the  New  York  Times,  explaining 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
why  the  firm  likes  athletes  on  the  trading  floor, 
During  the  1970s,  researchers  began  to  suggest  that  particularly  in  ugly  economic  times  like  these.  The 
human vulnerability to hazards, rather than the hazards  image  is  of  a  rider  easy  in  the  saddle.  Nothing  can  so 
themselves, was central to understanding the importance  surprise  her either  for  good  or  ill that  she’ll  be 
― ―
of hazards, particularly when considering that a city is a  knocked off.
geographical focus for large populations. Further, it was  One  way  to  help  keep  life’s  slings  and  arrows  from 
reported  that  human  and  material  losses  from  disasters  knocking  you  off  course  is  to  ensure  your  life  is 
had increased during the 20th century. This happened at  ,  says  Stephen  Berglas,  a  California 
a  time  when  cities  in  the  developing  world  were  psychologist  and  personal  coach.  That  way,  a  setback  in 
growing  at  unprecedented  rates,  bringing  together  large  any  one  area  won’t  mean  in  your  mind  that  you’re  a 
populations  of  low  income  urban  residents,  often  on  failure  categorically.  Call  it  spreading  your  risk  across 
hazardous spontaneous settlements which made them far  your  emotional  portfolio or  adding  another  leg  to  the 
―
more vulnerable to natural and human-induced hazards.  furniture for balance, says Berglas.
It  is  precisely  this  issue  of  vulnerability  on  which  a 
*equanimity: 마음의 평정
number of social scientists focused, arguing that although 
floods, landslides and earthquakes are natural processes, 
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
the disasters that can be associated with them are not a 
result of natural processes, but of human vulnerability. Do Not Let Failure Fail You
① 
??
Recipe for Attaining Physical Stability
② 
Physical Toughness and Mental Flexibility
③ 
With  the  dramatic  growth  of  (A)   in  developing 
How to Survive Emotional Unrest in Sports
④ 
countries, environmental hazards could turn into disasters 
Failure as an Enemy of Emotional Calmness
⑤ 
for those who are unable to (B)  their impacts.
(A) (B)
population magnify
① ……
economy figure out 42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
② ……
③ economy …… cope with ①  illusionary ②  predictable
④ cities …… cope with ③ convergent ④ straightforward
⑤ cities …… magnify ⑤ multidimensional
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(A)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
(A) 가장 적절한 것은?
(B) (C) (D)
To  be  creative  problem  solvers,  people  must  learn  to  ①  － －
(B) (D) (C)
approach complexity with a certain naive simplicity. And  ②  － －
(C) (D) (B)
by  letting  their  thinking  become  more  free,  they  can  ③  － －
(D) (B) (C)
improve  their  chances  of  discovering  new  unencumbered  ④  － －
(D) (C) (B)
perceptions  of  old  problems  or  entirely  new  creations.  ⑤  － －
For  this,  they  can  mentally  play  with  the  ideas  in  a 
childlike  manner.  Here  is  an  example  story.  In  a  small 
Moravian  village  at  the  time  of  the  old  Austrian  empire, 
an  inspector  from  the  Ministry  of  Education  arrived  one 
(a) (e)
day  to  visit  the  schoolroom.  It  was  part  of  (a)his  duty  44. 밑줄 친  ∼   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
to make such periodic inspections of the schools. 것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
*unencumbered: 방해받지 않는 ① ② ③ ④ ⑤
(B)
At  the  end  of  the  hour,  after  he  had  observed  the 
class,  he  stood  up  and  said:  “I  am  glad  to  see  that  you 
inspector
children  are  doing  well  in  your  studies.  I  am  satisfied  45. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
with  your  progress.  Therefore,  before  I  go,  there  is  one  Moravia
① 에 있는 한 학교를 방문했다.
question  I  would  like  to  ask.  How  many  hairs  does  a 
② 학생들의 학업 향상에 만족한다고 말했다.   
horse  have?”  Very  quickly  one  little  nine-year-old  boy 
③ 말의 털이 몇 개인지 기억할 수 없었다고 말했다. 
raised  his  hand,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  teacher  and 
④ 소년의 대답이 재미있었지만 억지로 웃음을 참았다. 
the  visitor.  (b)He  stood  up  and  said,  “The  horse  has  Vienna
⑤ 에 가서 동료들에게 이 이야기를 들려주겠다고 말했다.
3,571,962  hairs.”  The  inspector  wonderingly  asked,  “And 
how  do  you  know  that  this  is  the  right  number?”  The 
boy replied, “If you do not believe me, you could count 
them yourself.” 
(C)
It  was  a  year  later,  and  the  inspector  was  back  again 
at  the  village  school  for  his  annual  visit.  As  the  teacher 
was walking along the aisle with (c)him to the door, he 
stopped  and  said,  “By  the  way,  Mr.  Inspector,  how  did 
your  colleagues  like  the  story  of  the  horse  and  the 
number  of  his  hairs?”  The  inspector  slapped  the  teacher 
on  the  back.  “Oh  yes,”  he  said,  “you  know,  I  was 
really  very  anxious  to  tell  that  story and  a  fine  story 
―
it  was but  you  see,  I  wasn’t  able  for  the  life  of  me 
―
to remember the number of hairs.”
(D)
The  inspector  broke  into  loud  laughter,  thoroughly 
enjoying the boy’s remark. As the teacher escorted (d)him 
along  the  aisle  to  the  door,  still  laughing  heartily,  he 
said:  “What  an  amusing  story!  I  must  tell  this  story  to 
my colleagues when I return to Vienna. I can already see 
how  they  will  take  it;  they  enjoy  nothing  better  than  a  *  확인 사항
good joke.” And with that, he took (e)his leave.
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2019학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가
영어 영역 듣기평가 대본
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
W: Excuse me, I’m looking for the book The World of Biology. But I can’t find 
it here.
M: Let me check. [Typing sound] I’m sorry, but that book is currently out of 
stock.
W: I really need to buy that book. Could you call me when it’s in stock?
M:
- 1 -2. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[Telephone rings.]
M: Hello, Dr. Kelly’s office. How may I help you?
W: I have a severe sunburn on my back. Can I see the doctor today?
M: Dr. Kelly is busy this morning, but she’s available this afternoon.
W:
- 2 -3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
W: Hello, residents! This is Dana from the management office. Recently, we’ve 
had many complaints from residents concerning moving. So, we’d like to 
ask you to follow our guidelines when moving out. First, contact our office 
to reserve the elevator one week prior to moving. Making a reservation can 
help prevent any inconvenience to other residents. Second, do not park your 
moving  trucks  in  front  of  building  entrances.  Parking  there  may  cause 
accidents and block traffic. One more thing. Large items like furniture or 
electronics must be thrown away in the proper area. Failure to do so will 
create a messy environment. By following these guidelines, you can help 
make our community a better place. Thank you for your cooperation. 
- 3 -4. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
M: Vanessa, why haven’t you gone to bed? It’s late. 
W: Dad, I wish I could, but I’m so busy preparing for my science presentation. 
M: Oh, that’s the group project you mentioned. What’s your role? 
W: I’m the leader.
M: What work are you doing? 
W: I’m collecting data, creating slides, and giving the presentation.
M: You’re doing everything! In a group project, reasonable job distribution is 
important. What are the others doing?  
W: They’ll give me their opinions. 
M: Vanessa, I think you need to share the work reasonably with the other members. 
W: I agree. I didn’t realize how hard it would be to do all these jobs alone. 
M: Why don’t you divide the work among the group members? That’ll make 
your presentation a real group project.
W: You’re right. I’ll do that.  
- 4 -5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
W: Hi, Mr. Conner. Thanks for accepting my interview request. 
M: My pleasure, Ms. Leyden. 
W: Can you briefly introduce your center for our readers?
M: Sure. We rescue and treat wild animals that are seriously sick or injured.
W: How do you treat them?
M: We provide food and medical care until they get healthy enough to return to 
the wild. 
W: You’re making a real difference in the lives of these wild animals. How 
many animals are you taking care of now?
M: We have about seventy. 
W: That must be a lot of work.
M: It is. That’s why we need support from your readers. Your newspaper article 
will raise public awareness. Donations to our rescue center will also help. 
W: I see. May I take a few pictures for my article? 
M: Sure. Come this way. 
- 5 -6. 대화를 듣고, 그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
M: Ms. Moore, this is where you’ll be staying while you’re with us. 
W: Wow! This room looks very nice. Can I use the phone on the bedside table?
M: Sure. Feel free to use it. 
W: Good to know. I like the lamp above the bed on the wall. It’ll be useful 
when I read in bed. 
M: I think it will. And I just put the flower-patterned blanket on the bed before 
you came. 
W: It’s very lovely. Oh, look at the mountains in the photo next to the window. 
They’re beautiful. 
M: They’re the mountains behind the town where I grew up. 
W: I see. May I use the computer on the desk?  
M: Of course. It’s connected to the Internet.  
W: Great. I’m lucky to get this room.
- 6 -7. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
W: Tony, the re-opening ceremony of our fitness center is only a week away. 
M: Right. All the renovations are finished.
W: Yes. Everything’s been put back including the new workout machines. 
M: I saw them. They look good in the new space. Our members will love them.
W: Now we can focus on preparing for the re-opening ceremony. 
M: Oh, Michelle. I already prepared some tea and snacks.
W: You did? Why didn’t you ask me to help you?
M: It was super easy. Thanks, though. 
W: Then, we need to order banners. And I think we should send a text message 
to invite our members to the ceremony.
M: Okay. I’ll send the text message.
W: Perfect. While you’re doing that, I’ll order the banners.
- 7 -8. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 기숙사에서 나가려는 이유를 고르시오.
[Cell phone rings.]
M: Hello?
W: Hello, Joe. How’s your university life?
M: It’s awesome, except I spend too much time doing assignments.
W: I know! I didn’t think I’d have to study this much.
M: And I heard you’re living in your school dorm. 
W: You know what? I’m moving out of the dormitory.
M: Why? Do you have problems with the facilities?
W: No, I don’t. The facilities are quite nice. It’s something else completely.
M: Oh, are you having trouble with your roommate?
W: No. She’s great. She helped me to adjust to university life.
M: Then, I don’t get why you made that decision.
W: Actually, my family recently moved near the university. So I’m going to live 
with them.
M: Ah, now I understand. 
- 8 -9. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
W: Welcome to the Westview Cinema Festival. How may I help you?
M: I want to buy some festival passes.
W: We have two different kinds of passes, Regular and Deluxe.
M: What’s the Regular Pass?
W: With the Regular Pass, you can watch any two movies you want during the 
festival. It’s $20. 
M: What about the Deluxe Pass?
W: With the Deluxe Pass, you can see any five movies you want. It costs $30.
M: I’ll take three Deluxe Passes.
W: Anything else? You can purchase a program book for $10.
M: Okay. Just give us one. We’ll share it.
W: That’ll be three Deluxe Passes and one program book, right?
M: Right. Can I use this 10% discount coupon?
W: I’m sorry. That coupon only applies to purchases over $200. 
M: Fine. I’ll pay with my credit card.
- 9 -10. 대화를 듣고, Tanzania Volunteer Program에 관해 언급되지 않은 것을 고르시오.
M: Laura, what are you reading there?
W: Hi,  Allen.  It’s a  brochure  for the Tanzania Volunteer  Program.  It’s for 
students. 
M: When is the program?
W: It goes from August 6th to August 20th. 
M: What activities will the volunteers do? 
W: There are many activities to choose from. Look here. The participants will 
assist patients in a hospital, help children in need, or teach English.
M: That sounds like exactly what you’ve been looking for. Oh, the participation 
fee is $250.
W: Yes. It’s not as expensive as I thought. 
M: You’re going to participate, aren’t you?
W: Yes. I really want to spend my vacation doing something meaningful. 
M: You’d better hurry up. The brochure says the deadline for application is 
June 11th. That’s next Monday. 
W: I saw that. I plan to talk about it with my parents tonight.
- 10 -11. 2018 Youth History Tour에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 고르시오.
W: Good morning, students. This is your history teacher, Ms. Spencer. I have an 
announcement on the 2018 Youth History Tour. This tour aims to promote 
students’ interest in history. It’s a one-week tour which goes from July 25th 
to July 31st. During this period, the students who join this tour will visit five 
cities and explore their various historic sites. A historian will guide the tour 
and offer in-depth explanations of each location. The participation fee is 
$170, but traveler’s insurance isn’t included. You’ll need to buy it yourself. 
I  hope  that  many  students  will  join  the  tour  and  have  a  memorable 
experience.  Please  visit  my  office  by  this  Friday  for  more  information. 
Thank you. 
- 11 -12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 여자가 주문할 식탁을 고르시오.
M: Honey, look at this website. There’s a big sale on dining tables.
W: Really? Let’s get one. Ours is old.
M: It is. Which one do you think we should get?
W: Hmm. I think we need a table for at least four people. 
M: Right. We can have visitors and dine together.
W: We should decide our price range.
M: Well, we can’t afford a table over $500. 
W: Then, these models are within our budget.
M: I like marble tables. They look more stylish than wood.
W: I agree. Now we have just two options left. 
M: Which color shall we choose? How about brown?
W: Hmm, that won’t match our wallpaper very well.
M: That’s a good point. I didn’t think about that. Let’s buy the other one.
W: Okay. I’ll order it now.
- 12 -13. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[3점]
W: Jason, why did your little brother lock himself in his room?
M: We kind of argued. You know his soccer team lost the final game yesterday, 
right?
W: Of course I do. He cried a lot. 
M: This morning, I said something that made him mad. 
W: What did you say?
M: I told him that he made too many mistakes in the game.
W: Jason! Why did you say that? You know he feels bad already.
M: I just wanted to motivate him to do better next time.
W: Sweetie, your brother probably needs your support, not criticism.
M: But I thought honest criticism could be helpful, too.
W: Your brother just wants you to stand by him.
M: Well, I guess you’re right. I was too mean. I should’ve comforted him. 
W: I agree. Now, you know what you need to do. 
M:
- 13 -14. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[3점]
M: Hi, Olivia. How was your weekend?
W: Good. Didn’t you have a street singing performance last weekend? How was it?
M: Oh, it was a disaster.
W: What happened? 
M: At first, it was okay. But as a crowd gathered, my mind went blank and I 
forgot the lyrics.
W: I’m sorry to hear that. You’ll be fine next time.
M: There  won’t  be  a  next  time.  I’m  thinking  of  giving  up  on  the  singing 
audition next month.
W: Seriously? That audition is such a big chance for you!
M: But after ruining the street performance, I lost confidence.
W: It was just a one-time failure. I believe you’ll do great in the audition. You 
have a gift!
M: What if I get nervous again? I don’t want to repeat the same experience. 
W:
- 14 -15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고, Marcus가 Judy에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[3점]
W: Marcus and Judy are friends who are both interested in cooking. One day, 
Marcus finds a notice about a cooking competition for high school students. 
He asks Judy to join him as a team and Judy agrees. They begin practicing 
and focus on developing a new recipe for the competition. Just a week 
before the competition, Marcus is concerned that they’re too slow when they 
cook. No matter how good their recipe is, they’ll lose if they can’t finish on 
time. So Marcus wants to tell Judy that they should put more effort into 
training themselves to cook faster. In this situation, what would Marcus 
most likely say to Judy?
- 15 -16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 들려줍니다.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
M: Hello, students. Last class, we learned about famous artists in history. Today, 
I’ll talk about what a few famous artists regularly did to get inspiration for 
their creative work. First, let’s take a look at a well-known filmmaker, Ingmar 
Bergman. He worked at exactly the same time and even ate the same lunch 
every day. His daily habits were a driving force for his movies. Tchaikovsky, 
one of the greatest composers, always went for a long walk regardless of the 
weather. It was essential to his musical creativity. A famous British writer, 
Agatha Christie, had her own unusual habit, too. She used to sit in a bathtub 
and eat apples, which helped her to imagine the crimes she would put in her 
novels. Here’s one more interesting habit. Salvador Dali, a famous painter, 
used to nap while holding a key in his hand. When he fell asleep, the key 
would slip from his fingers, waking him up with the clink sound. He captured 
that moment between dreaming and waking on his canvas. So, what do you do 
regularly to come up with new ideas? 
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
- 16 -17. 언급된 직업이 아닌 것은?
- 17 -2019학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가
영어 영역 듣기평가 대본
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
M: Honey, are you making curtains? I didn’t know you could make them.
W: I learned how to make curtains in my craft class at the community center.
M: That’s great. Where did you get the materials?
W:
- 1 -2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
W: James, how’s your group’s practice going for the school choir competition?
M: Well, it’s not easy to find a place to practice, Ms. Williams. Can we use your 
music room?
W: Yes, you can. Just don’t make a mess. Last time, it was messy after students 
used it.
M:
- 2 -3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
M: Okay, class. We’re done with today’s lesson. But before you go, I’d like to 
tell you about the art exam next week. For the exam, I’ll show you 20 pieces 
of artwork you’ve previously studied in this course. You’ll be required to 
identify and write the artist and title of each work. You’ll have one minute 
for each artwork, and it’ll be shown only once. To study for the exam, review 
the list of artwork on the handout I gave you last week. The exam will start 
at 11:30 a.m. next Thursday. Please keep in mind this information about the 
exam as you prepare.
- 3 -4. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
M: Honey, Jonathan looks bored with his toys. I think he needs some new ones.
W: I agree. He’s five, but his toys are for younger children.
M: Why don’t we try a toy rental service instead of buying toys?
W: How does it work?
M: You pay a small monthly fee and take any toys you want. Then, you return 
them later.
W: Sounds good. That way, we could get Jonathan various new toys without 
paying much.
M: Besides, renting toys saves space in our house since we won’t store his old 
toys anymore.
W: Wonderful. I guess it’s also good for the environment.
M: What do you mean?
W: We could reduce waste by sharing one toy with other families instead of 
every family buying the same one.
M: Good point.
W: Using this service seems like a good option. Let’s try it.
- 4 -5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
W: Mr. Brown, how do you like our auditorium?
M: It’s great for my first solo concert, Ms. Anderson.
W: Good. My staff and I have worked hard to make everything perfect. Is there 
anything to adjust?
M: Well, I’d like the piano closer to the audience. Then, it’ll feel like I’m 
interacting with them more.
W: No problem. How about the lights?
M: They’re perfect, not too bright or dark.
W: Great. Anything else?
M: I played this piano before you came in. I think I need some time to get 
familiar with it before the rehearsal.
W: I understand. I’ve been managing this auditorium for ten years and I’ve seen 
other musicians have the same issue.
M: So, can I practice with the piano tomorrow morning?
W: Yes. I’ll tell my staff to open the auditorium from 9 a.m.
M: Thank you.
- 5 -6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
M: Lisa, is that you and your dad in the picture?
W: Yes. We went to a lakeside cabin last weekend. My dad loves fishing.
M: Your dad is under a parasol. Was it sunny?
W: It was. And he wanted to stay out of the sun.
M: There’s a round bucket next to the radio.
W: Yeah. My dad brought it to put fish in.
M: I see. [Pause] You have a badminton racket in your hand.
W: I was waiting for my mom to play with me. She was taking this picture at 
that moment.
M: Oh, I like the chimney on the roof of the cabin.
W: So do I. What about the two chairs in front of the tree?
M: They look comfortable.
W: They were great for watching the sun set.
M: Looks like you had a great time.
- 6 -7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[Cell phone rings.]
M: Tammy, what’s up?
W: Hi, Billy. How’s the semester going?
M: I’m so busy preparing for the play.
W: That’s  right.  You’re  producing  a  play  for  the  autumn  festival.  How’s  it 
going?
M: Pretty well. The first performance is in three weeks.
W: Great. Is everything ready?
M: Not yet. We’re still making the stage background. Students from the school 
art club are helping us.
W: I see. Anything I can help with? I can put up posters.
M: Thank you. But we’ve already put them up.
W: I wish I could help with something.
M: Well, we need someone to do the make-up for the actors. Didn’t you take a 
course on that before?
W: Yes, I did. [Pause] Okay, I’ll do the make-up for the actors.
M: Thanks. I appreciate it.
- 7 -8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 농구경기에 출전하지 않는  이유를 고르시오.
W: Jason, I heard you play on a local amateur basketball team.
M: Yes. In fact, we’re playing against Logan City this Saturday.
W: How exciting! Can I come and watch the game?
M: You could, but I’m not playing this time.
W: Why? Are you sick? I heard you took the day off yesterday to go to the 
hospital.
M: No, I’m fine. I had a regular medical check-up.
W: I see. Then, is it because of the sales report you were assigned last week?
M: I already finished it. Actually, I’m flying to Los Angeles tonight.
W: Los Angeles? Do you have a business trip?
M: No. I’m attending my father’s retirement party. All my family will be there.
W: Okay. Then, I’ll see you play some other time.
- 8 -9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
M: Welcome to Lakewood Furniture Depot.
W: Hi. I’m looking for some bedroom furniture.
M: Wonderful. Everything in our bedroom section is on sale now.
W: Oh, good. How much is this rocking chair? It looks comfortable.
M: It was $200, but now it’s only $100.
W: Alright. I’ll buy one. I also need a bedside table.
M: How about this one? It has lots of storage space.
W: Great. My husband and I love reading in bed, and it would be a convenient 
place for our books. How much is it?
M: It’s $40. But if you buy two, you’ll get a 50% discount on the second one.
W: So I’d get the second one at half price?
M: Exactly.
W: Then, I’ll get two.
M: Terrific. One rocking chair and two bedside tables. How will you pay?
W: By credit card.
- 9 -Middleton Public Hearing
10. 대화를 듣고,  에 관해 언급되지 않은  것을 고르시오.
W: Mark, will you be going to the Middleton Public Hearing? I know you’re 
interested in what’s going on in our city.
M: The Middleton Public Hearing?
W: Yes. The city holds it whenever there’s an issue affecting residents.
M: Oh, good. What’s going to be discussed?
W: The topic this time is the declining air quality in our city.
M: I’ve been worried about that. I’m glad the city is paying attention. When will 
it be held?
W: It’ll be held at 2 p.m. on Tuesday, October 2nd. Do you think you can 
make it?
M: I’m free that day. Where will it take place?
W: At City Hall.
M: Okay. Will there be an opportunity to ask questions?
W: Of course. There’s always time for questions and answers.
M: Great. I’ll be there.
- 10 -Megan’s Bites
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
M: Are you tired of always eating the same cookies from the supermarket? 
Then, it’s time to visit Megan’s Bites, a store famous for their handmade 
cookies. They use a recipe that the owner’s grandmother created. Thanks to 
this recipe, Megan’s Bites makes cookies which are crispy on the outside and 
soft on the inside. They’re so delicious that you won’t be able to stop eating 
them. In fact, Megan’s Bites was selected as the best cookie store by Dessert 
Magazine in 2017. Their first store is located in Boston. But their cookies are 
so popular that last month they opened their second store, which is in New 
York. Why don’t you go and try their cookies yourself? You won’t regret it.
- 11 -12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  여자가 주문할 노트북 컴퓨터 배낭을 고르시오.
W: Tony, can you help me buy a backpack for my laptop?
M: Sure. Let’s use this app. [Smartphone typing sound] Here are the five best 
selling models. What size do you want?
W: I want a backpack that’s bigger than 17 inches.
M: Okay. What’s your budget?
W: Well, I don’t want to spend more than $60.
M: Alright. You can also choose the number of inner pockets. How many do 
you want?
W: I’ll need at least five to put all my stuff in. [Pause] Oh, these backpacks 
come with a promotional gift.
M: Yeah. There are two options. Which one do you prefer?
W: Hmm... I already have several USB sticks, so I want the other one.
M: Then, it’s decided.
W: Yes. I’ll order it.
- 12 -13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[3점]
[Door knocks.]
M: Come in.
W: Hello, Mr. O’Grady. Can I ask a question about the student science contest?
M: You mean the Creative Inventions Contest, Ms. Kane? 
W: Yes. How many winners will we have?
M: Three. We’ll select a winner from each grade.
W: Well,  I  think  it’s  better  to  choose  the  best  three  inventions  from  all 
participants.
M: Really? But that would be unfair to first-graders.
W: Why do you think so?
M: The second- and third-graders have taken more science courses and therefore 
have more knowledge. 
W: I  see  your  point.  I  guess  that  knowledge  helps  them  generate  ideas  for 
inventions.
M: Plus, older students have know-how from previous contests. 
W: That’s true. Some third-graders in my class did tell me they’ll enter the 
contest again this year.
M: Exactly. That’s why it’s better to have a winner from each grade.
W:
- 13 -14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
W: Marcus, are you taking a summer course?
M: Yes, Mom. I’m going to take an online course.
W: Why online?
M: You know I’m not a morning person. And most offline summer courses are 
in the morning.
W: Well, if you go to school and take a class in the morning, you’ll get the most 
out of your day.
M: But I prefer online because I can have class when I study best.
W: Remember when you took an online class last summer? You had difficulty 
managing your time.
M: You’re right. I also didn’t focus on my studies because I was distracted by 
my computer.
W: I hope you make a better decision this time.
M: Yes. I guess attending an offline class would be good for me.
W: I think so, too.
M: My only concern is that I won’t wake up on time.
W: Don’t worry. I can help you with that.
M:
- 14 -Brian Ms. Clark
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이  에게 할 말로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.  [3점]
M: Ms. Clark started coaching the school cheerleading team last semester. She’s 
very dedicated to helping students, so she even worked on weekends. When 
the team entered the regional cheerleading competition, Ms. Clark taught 
them several advanced techniques to impress the judges. However, some 
members made mistakes while performing these difficult techniques. And 
they lost the competition. Now, Ms. Clark feels down because she blames 
herself for teaching techniques that were too difficult for the students. But 
the team members think they’ve improved a lot thanks to her coaching. So, 
Brian,  the  team  leader,  wants  to  tell  Ms.  Clark  that  the  team  members 
appreciate the time and effort she’s given them. In this situation, what would 
Brian most likely say to Ms. Clark?
- 15 -16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 들려줍니다.
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
W: Welcome to the Farrington Wellness Center. I’m Dr. Hannah Dawson. As you 
know, sleep is affected by many factors. According to research, one such factor 
is food. Some foods are good for sleep. For example, bananas are loaded with 
magnesium, a mineral that promotes sleep  by  helping  relax  your  muscles. 
Another good food is milk. Dairy products help the body make a hormone that 
helps  regulate  sleep.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  foods  to  avoid, 
especially before bed. Don’t order French fries late at night because fatty foods 
take long to digest, which harms the quality of your sleep. Also, put away 
candies before bed. Sugary foods can keep you awake because they increase 
your blood sugar. So if you’re having problems sleeping, take a look at your 
diet because good sleep depends on what you eat. Now, I’ll present some 
information from studies I’ve conducted on this topic.
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
- 16 -17. 언급된 음식이 아닌  것은?
- 17 -1
2021학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
7. 대화를 듣고,  동아리 봉사 활동이 연기된 이유를 고르시오.
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
① 기부받은 옷 정리 시간이 더 필요해서
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
② 동아리 홍보 동영상을 제작해야 해서
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
③ 중간고사 기간이 얼마 남지 않아서
④ 동아리 정기 회의를 개최해야 해서
1. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
⑤ 기부 행사 참가자가 부족해서
고르시오.
① 발명 대회 참가 신청 마감일 변경을 안내하려고 8. 대화를 듣고,  Annual Charity Baseball Game에 관해 언급되지 
② 수업 과제의 온라인 제출 방법을 설명하려고
않은  것을 고르시오.
③ 학교 홈페이지 운영 도우미를 모집하려고
① 참가 선수  ② 일시 ③ 입장료
④ 발명 아이디어 우수 사례를 소개하려고
④ 기념품 ⑤ 장소
⑤ 발명가 초청 특별 강연을 홍보하려고
Kaufman Special Exhibition
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 9. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
않는  것을 고르시오. 
① 보고서 주제는 구체적이어야 한다.
1995
② 도표 활용은 자료 제시에 효과적이다. ① 년에 처음 개최되었다.
③ 설문 대상에 따라 질문을 달리해야 한다. ② 월요일에는 열리지 않는다. 
④ 설문 조사자를 위한 사전 교육이 필요하다. ③ 올해의 주제는 예술과 기술의 결합이다.
100
⑤ 보고서 작성 시 도표 제시 순서에 유의해야 한다. ④ 일일 관람객 수를  명으로 제한한다.
⑤ 예매를 통해 할인을 받을 수 있다.
3. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  여자가 등록할 강좌를 고르시오.
① 화가－기자 ② 작곡가－가수
③ 시인－교사 ④ 영화감독－배우 Community Center Classes in July
⑤ 무용가－사진작가 Class Fee Location Start Time
Graphic Design $50 Greenville 5 p.m.
①
4. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을  Coding $70 Greenville 7 p.m.
②
고르시오. Photography $80 Westside 7 p.m.
③
Flower Art $90 Westside 5 p.m.
④
Coffee Brewing $110 Greenville 8 p.m.
⑤
11. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
I’ll be back tomorrow.
①
You liked the food there.
②
I go to the gym every day. 
③
You should be here by six.
④
We finished dinner already.
⑤
5. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.  12. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 저작권 확인하기 ② 포스터 인쇄하기
All right. I’ll take the bus then.
③ 프린터 구매하기 ④ 파일 전송하기 ①
⑤ 만화 그리기 ② No. My bicycle is broken again.
No problem. I’ll give you a ride.
③
6. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점] Don’t worry. I’m already at school.
④
$54 $55 $60 $63 $70 Indeed. I’m glad it’s getting warmer.
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤  ⑤
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
To whom it may concern,
Woman:
My name is Daniel. Since I joined your youth sports program 
Absolutely. I was impressed after reading this script.
① several years ago, I have really enjoyed swimming. Thanks to 
No doubt. I think I acted well in the last comedy.
② your program, I have become a good swimmer. Now I want 
Great. I’ll write the script for your new drama. to go one step further. I like helping people and hope to get a 
③
job as a lifeguard later. So I tried to sign up for your lifeguard 
I’m sorry. I’m not able to direct the movie.
④
training course this summer. But the course was so popular that 
Okay. I’ll let you know my decision soon.
⑤ the registration closed almost as soon as it opened. I couldn’t 
register and was really disappointed. I heard some of my 
friends couldn’t, either. I’m kindly asking you to open an 
additional course. I appreciate your consideration.
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
Sincerely,
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] Daniel Smith
Man:
① 구조원 양성 과정의 추가 개설을 요청하려고
That’s okay. You can reserve another place.
① ② 구조원 양성 과정의 우수성을 홍보하려고
② I see. I should hurry to join your company event. ③ 동계 수영 강습 프로그램 수강을 신청하려고
Why not? My company has its own sports facilities. ④ 수영 강사 일자리가 있는지 문의하려고
③
⑤ 구조원 양성 과정의 등록 방법을 안내하려고
I agree. We should wait until the remodeling is done.
④
Sharon
Thanks. I’ll call now to see if they’re available that day. 19. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
⑤
Sharon received a ticket to an upcoming tango concert from her 
friend. While surfing the Internet, she came across a review for 
the  concert.  The  reviewer  was  harsh,  calling  it  “an  awful 
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Mary가 Steve에게 할 말로 가장  performance.” That raised in Sharon’s mind the question of 
whether it was worthwhile to go, but in the end, she reluctantly 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
decided to attend the concert. The hall located in the old town was 
Mary:
ancient and run-down. Looking around, Sharon again wondered 
Why don’t you take leave today and look after yourself? what kind of show she could expect. But as soon as the tango 
①
started, everything changed. The piano, guitar, flute, and violin 
Your interests should be the priority in your job search.
② magically flew out in harmony. The audience cheered. “Oh my 
You’d better actively support your teammates’ ideas.
③ goodness! What fantastic music!” Sharon shouted. The rhythm 
Let’s find a way to increase sales of health products. and tempo were so energetic and sensational that they shook her 
④
body and soul. The concert was far beyond her expectations.
How about changing the details of the contract?
⑤
excited bored doubtful amazed
①  → ②  →
calm upset ashamed grateful
③  → ④  →
envious indifferent 
⑤  →
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Occasionally individuals do not merely come out as well as 
① reasons why chemicals are harmful to plants clearly state what is troubling them and instead select more 
ways that plants protect themselves from danger indirect means of expressing their annoyance. One companion 
②
might talk to the various other in a way that is condescending 
difficulties in preventing plants from overgrowing
③
and also indicates underlying hostility. Numerous other times, 
tips for keeping dangerous insects away from plants
④ partners may mope and even frown without genuinely dealing 
importance of recognizing poisonous plants in the wild with  an  issue.  Companions  may  likewise  merely  prevent 
⑤
discussing an issue by swiftly switching over topics when the 
subject turns up or by being incredibly vague. Such indirect 
ways of expressing temper are not useful since they don’t 
17. 언급된 식물이 아닌  것은? provide the individual that is the target of the behaviors, an 
idea of exactly how to react. They understand their companion 
roses tomato plants clovers
① ② ③ is irritated, but the absence of directness leaves them without 
cherry trees walnut trees advice regarding what they can do to solve the issue.
④ ⑤
*condescend: 거들먹거리다  **mope: 울적해하다
① 이성보다 감정에 호소하여 상대방을 설득해야 한다.
② 상대방의 기분을 상하게 하는 행동을 자제해야 한다. 
③ 문제 해결을 위해서는 문제를 직접적으로 언급해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
④ 타인의 입장을 이해하려면 경청하는 자세를 가져야 한다.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다. ⑤ 목표 달성을 방해하는 문제점을 지속적으로 파악해야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
21. 밑줄 친 journey edges가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장  23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
적절한 것은?  [3점] Problem framing amounts to defining what problem you are 
Many ancillary businesses that today seem almost core at one  proposing to solve. This is a critical activity because the frame 
time started out as journey edges. For example, retailers often  you  choose  strongly  influences  your  understanding  of  the 
boost sales with accompanying support such as assembly or  problem, thereby conditioning your approach to solving it. For an 
illustration,  consider  Thibodeau  and  Broditsky’s  series  of 
installation services. Think of a home goods retailer selling an 
experiments in which they asked people for ways to reduce crime 
unassembled outdoor grill as a box of parts and leaving its 
in a community. They found that the respondents’ suggestions 
customer’s mission incomplete. When that retailer also sells 
changed significantly depending on whether the metaphor used 
assembly and delivery, it takes another step in the journey to the 
to describe crime was as a virus or as a beast. People presented 
customer’s true mission of cooking in his backyard. Another 
with a metaphor comparing crime to a virus invading their city 
example is the business-to-business service contracts that are 
emphasized prevention and addressing the root causes of the 
layered on top of software sales. Maintenance, installation, 
problem, such as eliminating poverty and improving education. 
training, delivery, anything at all that turns do-it-yourself into a 
On the other hand, people presented with the beast metaphor 
do-it-for-me  solution  originally  resulted  from  exploring  the 
focused on remediations: increasing the size of the police force 
edge of where core products intersect with customer journeys.
and prisons. 
*ancillary: 보조의,  부차적인  **intersect: 교차하다 ① importance of asking the right questions for better solutions 
difficulty of using a metaphor to find solutions to a problem
requiring customers to purchase unnecessary goods ②
①
reasons why problem framing prevents solutions from appearing
decreasing customers’ dependence on business services ③
②
usefulness of preventive measures in reducing community crime
focusing more on selling end products than components ④
③
effect of problem framing on approaching and solving problems
adding a technological breakthrough to their core products ⑤
④
providing extra services beyond customers’ primary purchase
⑤
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
A  common  error  in  current  Darwinian  thinking  is  the 
assumption  that  “selfish  genes”  are  the  prime  mover  in 
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
evolution. In strict Darwinism the prime mover is environmental 
Official  definitions  of  sport  have  important  implications. 
threat. In the absence of threat, natural selection tends to resist 
When a definition emphasizes rules, competition, and high 
change. It is un-biological to “explain” behavioural change as 
performance, many people will be excluded from participation or 
resulting from genetic change or the ex vacuo emergence of 
avoid other physical activities that are defined as “second class.” 
domain-specific  brain  modules.  Evolutionary  psychologists 
For example, when a 12-year-old is cut from an exclusive club 
surely know why brains evolved: as Cosmides and Tooby point 
soccer team, she may not want to play in the local league because 
out, brains are found only in animals that move. Brains are 
she sees it as “recreational activity” rather than a real sport. This 
behavioural organs, and behavioural adaptation, being immediate 
can create a situation in which most people are physically 
and non-random, is vastly more efficient than genetic adaptation. 
inactive at the same time that a small number of people perform 
So, in animals with brains, behavioural change is the usual first 
at relatively high levels for large numbers of fans a situation 
―
response to environmental threat. If the change is successful, 
that negatively impacts health and increases health-care costs in 
genetic  adaptation  to  the  new  behaviour  will  follow  more 
a society or community. When sport is defined to include a wide 
gradually. Animals do not evolve carnivore teeth and then decide 
range of physical activities that are played for pleasure and 
it might be a good idea to eat meat.
integrated into local expressions of social life, physical activity 
rates will be high and overall health benefits are likely. *ex vacuo: 무(無)에서의  **carnivore: 육식 동물
Which Adapts First, Behaviour or Genes?
①
① 운동선수의 기량은 경기 자체를 즐길 때 향상된다.
The Brain Under Control of Selfish Genes
②
② 공정한 승부를 위해 합리적인 경기 규칙이 필요하다.
Why Animals Eat Meat: A Story of Survival
③ 스포츠의 대중화는 스포츠 산업의 정의를 바꾸고 있다. ③
Genes Always Win the Battle Against Nature!
④ 스포츠의 정의는 신체 활동 참여와 건강에 영향을 미친다. ④
The Superior Efficiency of Genetic Adaptation
⑤ 활발한 여가 활동은 원만한 대인 관계 유지에 도움이 된다. ⑤
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. Singing Tommy  사용에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
Global Plastic Waste Generation by Industry in 2015 않는  것은?
Market Sectors Million Tons % Singing Tommy
Packaging 141 46.69 Congratulations! Tommy is now your singing friend. Read 
Textiles 38 12.58 these instructions to learn how to play with and care for him. 
Consumer and Institutional Products 37 12.25 Tommy sings to you anytime, anywhere. An Internet connection 
Transportation 17 5.63 is not required to play the songs!
Electrical and Electronic 13 4.30
Before Use 
Building and Construction 13 4.30 1.Remove the protective film covering Tommy’s eyes.
Industrial Machinery 1 0.33 2.Insert two AA batteries into the battery box and press 
Others 42 13.91 the power button.
Total 302 100 3.Choose your volume setting: LOW volume or HIGH 
volume. 
Note: Due to rounding, the percentages may not sum to 100%.
Operation
The above table shows global plastic waste generation by 
1.Play 
industry in 2015. The sector that generated plastic waste 
① - Touch Tommy’s right ear to start a song.
most  was  packaging,  accounting  for  46.69%  of  all  plastic 
2.Stop
waste generated. The textiles sector generated 38 million  - Press Tommy’s hat to stop the song.
②
tons of plastic waste, or 12.58% of the total plastic waste  3.Control
- Choose from five songs. 
generated. The consumer and institutional products sector 
③
- Push Tommy’s badge to skip to the next song.
generated 37 million tons of plastic waste, and the amount was 
Caution
more than twice that of plastic waste the transportation sector 
Tommy is not waterproof. Be careful not to get Tommy wet!
generated. The  electrical  and  electronic  sector  generated 
④
just as much plastic waste as the building and construction 
① 인터넷에 연결되지 않아도 노래를 재생할 수 있다.
sector did, each sector accounting for 8.60% of the total plastic  AA
② 사용 전에 두 개의    건전지를 넣어야 한다.
waste generation. Only one million tons of plastic waste 
⑤ ③ 모자를 누르면 노래가 시작된다.
were generated in the industrial machinery sector, representing 
④ 다섯 곡의 노래 중에 선택할 수 있다.
less than 0.50% of the total plastic waste generated. ⑤ 방수가 되지 않는다.
2020 Crime & Spy Science Workshop
28. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 
William McDougall
26. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 
내용과 일치하는 것은?
것은?
2020 Crime & Spy Science Workshop
Born in Lancashire, England, in 1871, William McDougall 
Come learn to be a top detective! In this workshop, you 
left his mark on experimental and physiological psychology. 
will investigate crime scenes and learn skills necessary to 
After  receiving  a  degree  in  natural  sciences  in  Cambridge 
become a detective and solve mysteries!
University,  he  became  interested  in  human  behavior.  He 
When & Where
believed  human  behavior  to  be  based  on  three  abilities
― 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Tuesday, August 18, 2020 
?
intellect, emotion, and will. Being a hardworking scholar, he  Conference Room #103, ZBU Student Union
?
held academic positions in several universities in England. He  Who: Ages 14 and up
also wrote many books on psychology including the well-known 
Participation Fee: $20 (insurance not included)
Introduction to Social Psychology. In 1920, he published The 
Registration
Group Mind opposing mechanistic interpretations of human  Call 555-540-0421, or email spyscience@zbu.edu 
?
behavior. However, The Group Mind was poorly received when  by Wednesday, July 29, 2020.
published. Somewhat disappointed, he moved to the United  Preparations
States in the same year to be a professor at Harvard University.  ?Bring comfortable shoes and a bag to carry detective tools.
Lunch and snacks are provided.
Seven years later, he moved to Duke University, where he  ?
You will learn
developed  a  psychology  department  and  continued  various 
how to find traces of suspects.
research. Today many people read his books, and psychologists  ?
how to manage the scene of a crime.
?
celebrate his intellectual achievements.
how to choose the right tools.
?
Cambridge University
① 에서 학위를 받았다. 
① 이틀 동안 진행된다.
② 인간 행동이 세 가지 능력에 근거한다고 믿었다.
② 참가비에 보험이 포함되어 있다.
The Group Mind
③ 는 출판되었을 때 매우 인정받았다.
③ 등록은 이메일로만 할 수 있다.
Duke University
④ 에서 다양한 연구를 계속하였다. ④ 점심과 간식은 제공되지 않는다.
⑤ 오늘날 심리학자들은 그의 지적 업적을 기린다. ⑤ 적절한 도구를 선택하는 방법을 배울 것이다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은? [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
People from more individualistic cultural contexts tend to be  31. Research  with  human  runners  challenged  conventional 
motivated to maintain self-focused agency or control  as these  wisdom and found that the ground-reaction forces at the foot 
①
serve as the basis of one’s self-worth. With this form of agency  and the shock transmitted up the leg and through the body 
after impact with the ground   as runners 
comes the belief that individual successes  depending primarily 
②
moved from extremely compliant to extremely hard running 
on one’s own abilities and actions, and thus, whether by influencing 
surfaces. As a result, researchers gradually began to believe 
the environment or trying to accept one’s circumstances, the use 
that  runners  are  subconsciously  able  to  adjust  leg  stiffness 
of control ultimately centers on the individual. The independent 
prior to foot strike based on their perceptions of the hardness 
self may be more  driven to cope by appealing to a sense of 
③ or stiffness of the surface on which they are running. This 
agency or control. However, people from more interdependent 
view suggests that runners create soft legs that soak up impact 
cultural contexts tend to be less focused on issues of individual  forces when they are running on very hard surfaces and stiff 
success and agency and more motivated towards group goals and  legs when they are moving along on yielding terrain. As a 
harmony. Research has shown  that East Asians prefer to  result, impact forces passing through the legs are strikingly 
④
similar over a wide range of running surface types. Contrary to 
receive, but not seek, more social support rather than seek personal 
popular belief, running on concrete is not more damaging to 
control in certain cases. Therefore, people  who hold a more 
⑤
the legs than running on soft sand. 
[3점]
interdependent self-construal may prefer to cope in a way that 
*compliant: 말랑말랑한  **terrain: 지형
promotes harmony in relationships.
varied little
①
*self-construal: 자기 구성 decreased a lot
②
suddenly peaked 
③
gradually appeared
④
were hardly generated 
⑤
32. One of the great risks of writing is that even the simplest of 
choices  regarding  wording  or  punctuation  can  sometimes 
 in ways that may 
seem unfair. For example, look again at the old grammar rule 
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지  forbidding the splitting of infinitives. After decades of telling 
students to never split an infinitive (something just done in 
않은  것은?
this sentence), most composition experts now acknowledge 
Chunking is vital for cognition of music. If we had to encode 
that a split infinitive is not a grammar crime. Suppose you 
it in our brains note by note, we’d  struggle to make sense of 
①
have  written  a  position paper  trying to  convince  your  city 
anything more complex than the simplest children’s songs. Of 
council of the need to hire security personnel for the library, 
course, most accomplished musicians can play compositions 
and half of the council members the people you wish to 
―
containing many thousands of notes entirely from  memory, 
② convince remember  their  eighth-grade  grammar  teacher’s 
―
without  a  note  out  of  place.  But  this  seemingly  awesome 
warning  about  splitting  infinitives.  How  will  they  respond 
accomplishment of recall is made  improbable by remembering  when you tell them, in your introduction, that librarians are 
③
the musical process, not the individual notes as such. If you ask  compelled “to always accompany” visitors to the rare book 
a pianist to start a Mozart sonata from bar forty-one, she’ll  room because of the threat of damage? How much of their 
attention have you suddenly lost because of their automatic 
probably have to  mentally replay the music from the start until 
④
recollection of what is now a nonrule? It is possible, in other 
reaching that bar the score is not simply laid out in her mind, 
―
words, to write correctly and still offend your readers’ notions 
to be read from any random point. It’s rather like describing how 
of your language competence.
you drive to work: you don’t simply recite the names of roads as 
*punctuation: 구두점  **infinitive: 부정사(不定詞)
an abstract list, but have to construct your route by mentally 
reveal your hidden intention
①
retracing it. When musicians make a mistake during rehearsal, 
distort the meaning of the sentence
②
they wind back to the  start of a musical phrase (‘let’s take it 
⑤ prejudice your audience against you
③
from the second verse’) before restarting.
test your audience’s reading comprehension 
④
*chunking: 덩어리로 나누기  **bar: (악보의)  마디 ⑤ create fierce debates about your writing topic
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. Even when we do something as apparently simple as picking up  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은? 
a screwdriver, our brain automatically 
. One of the most widespread, and sadly mistaken, environmental 
We can literally feel things with the end of the screwdriver. 
myths is that living “close to nature” out in the country or in a 
When  we  extend  a  hand,  holding  the  screwdriver,  we 
leafy suburb is the best “green” lifestyle. Cities, on the other 
automatically take the length of the latter into account. We can 
hand,  are  often  blamed  as  a  major  cause  of  ecological 
probe  difficult-to-reach  places  with  its  extended  end,  and 
destruction artificial, crowded places that suck up precious 
―
comprehend what we are exploring. Furthermore, we instantly 
resources. Yet, when you look at the facts, nothing could be 
regard the screwdriver we are holding as “our” screwdriver, and 
farther from the truth. The pattern of life in the country and 
①
get possessive about it. We do the same with the much more 
most suburbs involves long hours in the automobile each week, 
complex tools we use, in much more complex situations. The 
burning fuel and pumping out exhaust to get to work, buy 
cars  we  pilot  instantaneously  and  automatically  become 
groceries, and take kids to school and activities. City dwellers, 
②
ourselves. Because of this, when someone bangs his fist on 
on the other hand, have the option of walking or taking transit to 
our car’s hood after we have irritated him at a crosswalk, we 
work, shops, and school. The larger yards and houses found 
③
take it personally. This is not always reasonable. Nonetheless, 
outside cities also create an environmental cost in terms of 
without  the  extension  of  self  into  machine,  it  would  be 
energy use, water use, and land use. This illustrates the 
④
impossible to drive. 
[3점] tendency that most city dwellers get tired of urban lives and 
*probe: 탐색하다 decide to settle in the countryside. ⑤It’s clear that the future of 
recalls past experiences of utilizing the tool the Earth depends on more people gathering together in compact 
①
recognizes what it can do best without the tool communities. 
②
③ judges which part of our body can best be used *compact: 밀집한
perceives what limits the tool’s functional utility
④
adjusts what it considers body to include the tool
⑤
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Studies of people struggling with major health problems 
show that the majority of respondents report they derived 
benefits from their adversity. Stressful events sometimes 
force people to develop new skills, reevaluate priorities, 
learn new insights, and acquire new strengths. 
34. A large part of what we see is what we expect to see. This 
(A) High levels of adversity predicted poor mental health, as 
explains  why  we  “see”  faces  and  figures  in  a  flickering 
expected, but people who had faced intermediate levels of 
campfire, or in moving clouds. This is why Leonardo da Vinci 
adversity were healthier than those who experienced little 
advised artists to discover their motifs by staring at patches on 
adversity, suggesting that moderate amounts of stress can 
a blank wall. A fire provides a constant flickering change in 
foster resilience. A follow-up study found a similar link 
visual information that never integrates into anything solid and 
between the amount of lifetime adversity and subjects’ 
thereby allows the brain to engage in a play of hypotheses. On 
responses to laboratory stressors.
the other hand, the wall does not present us with very much in 
the way of visual clues, and so the brain begins to make more  (B) Intermediate levels of adversity were predictive of the greatest 
and more hypotheses and desperately searches for confirmation.  resilience. Thus, having to deal with a moderate amount of 
A crack in the wall looks a little like the profile of a nose and  stress may build resilience in the face of future stress. 
suddenly  a  whole  face  appears,  or  a  leaping  horse,  or  a 
(C) In other words, the adaptation process initiated by stress 
dancing figure. In cases like these the brain’s visual strategies 
can lead to personal changes for the better. One study that 
are  . 
[3점] measured  participants’  exposure  to  thirty-seven  major 
*flicker: 흔들리다 negative events found a curvilinear relationship between 
lifetime adversity and mental health. 
ignoring distracting information unrelated to visual clues 
①
projecting images from within the mind out onto the world *resilience: 회복력
②
categorizing objects into groups either real or imagined (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ ① － － ② － －
strengthening connections between objects in the real world (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ ③ － － ④ － －
removing the broken or missing parts of an original image (C) (B) (A)
⑤ ⑤ － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.  
The fruit ripening process brings about the softening of  When the team painted fireflies’ light organs dark, a new 
cell walls, sweetening and the production of chemicals that  set of bats took twice as long to learn to avoid them.
give colour and flavour. The process is induced by the 
Fireflies don’t just light up their behinds to attract mates, 
production of a plant hormone called ethylene. 
they also glow to tell bats not to eat them. This twist in the tale 
(A) If  ripening  could  be  slowed  down  by  interfering  with  of the trait that gives fireflies their name was discovered by 
ethylene production or with the processes that respond to  Jesse  Barber  and  his  colleagues.  The  glow’s  warning  role 
benefits both fireflies and bats, because these insects taste 
ethylene, fruit could be left on the plant until it was ripe 
disgusting to the mammals. ( ) When swallowed, chemicals 
and full of flavour but would still be in good condition  ①
released by fireflies cause bats to throw them back up. ( ) 
when it arrived at the supermarket shelf.  ②
The team placed eight bats in a dark room with three or four 
(B) In some countries they are then sprayed with ethylene 
fireflies  plus  three  times  as  many  tasty  insects,  including 
before sale to the consumer to induce ripening. However, 
beetles and moths, for four days. ( ) During the first night, 
③
fruit picked before it is ripe has less flavour than fruit 
all the bats captured at least one firefly. ( ) But by the 
④
picked ripe from the plant. Biotechnologists therefore saw 
fourth night, most bats had learned to avoid fireflies and catch 
an  opportunity  in  delaying  the  ripening  and  softening 
all the other prey instead. ( ) It had long been thought that 
⑤
process in fruit.
firefly bioluminescence mainly acted as a mating signal, but 
(C) The problem for growers and retailers is that ripening is  the new finding explains why firefly larvae also glow despite 
followed  sometimes  quite  rapidly  by  deterioration  and  being immature for mating.
decay and the product becomes worthless. Tomatoes and 
*bioluminescence: 생물 발광(發光)    **larvae: larva(애벌레)의 복수형
other fruits are, therefore, usually picked and transported 
when they are unripe.
[3점]
(A)
*deterioration: (품질의)  저하 40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  , 
(B)
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) 에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
① － － ② － －
③ (B) － (C) －(A) ④ (C) －(A) － (B) Some environments are more likely to lead to fossilization 
(C) (B) (A) and  subsequent  discovery  than  others.  Thus,  we  cannot 
⑤ － －
assume that more fossil evidence from a particular period or 
place means that more individuals were present at that time, 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
or in that place. It may just be that the circumstances at one 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
period of time, or at one location, were more favourable for 
38. fossilization than they were at other times, or in other places. 
Likewise,  the  absence  of  hominin  fossil  evidence  at  a 
Compounding the difficulty, now more than ever, is what 
particular time or place does not have the same implication as 
ergonomists call information overload, where a leader is 
its presence. As the saying goes, ‘absence of evidence is not 
overrun with inputs via e-mails, meetings, and phone 
― evidence of absence’. Similar logic suggests that taxa are 
calls that only distract and confuse her thinking.   
― likely to have arisen before they first appear in the fossil 
record, and they are likely to have survived beyond the time 
Clarity  is  often  a  difficult  thing  for  a  leader  to  obtain. 
of their most recent appearance in the fossil record. Thus, the 
Concerns of the present tend to seem larger than potentially 
first appearance datum, and the last appearance datum of 
greater concerns that lie farther away. ( ) Some decisions 
①
taxa in the hominin fossil record are likely to be conservative 
by  their  nature  present  great  complexity,  whose  many 
statements about the times of origin and extinction of a taxon.
variables must come together a certain way for the leader to 
succeed. ( ) Alternatively, the leader’s information might  *subsequent: 다음의  **hominin fossil: 인류 화석
② ***taxa: taxon(분류군)의 복수형
be only fragmentary, which might cause her to fill in the gaps  ??
with assumptions sometimes without recognizing them as 
―
such. ( ) And  the  merits  of  a  leader’s  most  important  Since  fossilization  and  fossil  discovery  are  affected  by 
③
decisions, by their nature, typically are not clear-cut. ( )  (A)  conditions, the fossil evidence of a taxon cannot 
④
Instead those decisions involve a process of assigning weights  definitely  (B)  its population size or the times of its 
to  competing  interests,  and  then  determining,  based  upon  appearance and extinction.
some criterion, which one predominates. ( ) The result is 
⑤ (A) (B) (A) (B)
one of judgment, of shades of gray; like saying that Beethoven 
experimental confirm experimental reveal
① …… ② ……
is a better composer than Brahms.
[3점] environmental clarify environmental conceal 
③ …… ④ ……
*ergonomist: 인간 공학자  **fragmentary: 단편적인 ⑤ accidental ……mask
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. (B)
In many mountain regions, rights of access to water are  Once Steven had heard his dad’s words, tears started to fill 
associated with the possession of land until recently in the  up in his eyes. “I was foolish,” Steven said regretfully. He 
―
Andes, for example, land and water rights were (a)combined  took the letter and the prize to school and handed them to 
so  water  rights  were  transferred  with  the  land.  However,  Stephanie. He congratulated her wholeheartedly and she was 
through state land reforms and the development of additional  thrilled. On the way home after school, his steps were light 
sources of supply, water rights have become separated from  and full of joy. That night, his dad was very pleased to hear 
land, and may be sold at auction. This therefore (b)favours  what  he  had  done  at  school. “(b)I  am  so  proud  of  you, 
those who can pay, rather than ensuring access to all in the  Steven,” he said. Then, without a word, he handed Steven 
two Ace Amusement Park tickets and winked.
community. The situation arises, therefore, where individuals 
may hold land with no water. In Peru, the government grants 
(C)
water to communities separately from land, and it is up to 
“If I don’t tell Stephanie, perhaps she will never know,” 
the  community  to  allocate  it.  Likewise  in  Yemen,  the 
Steven thought for a moment. He remembered that the winner 
traditional allocation was one measure (tasah) of water to one 
would only be notified by mail. As long as he kept quiet, 
hundred  ‘libnah’  of  land.  This  applied  only  to  traditional 
nobody would know. So he decided to sleep on it. The next 
irrigation supplies from runoff, wells, etc., where a supply 
―
morning, he felt miserable and his dad recognized it right 
was (c)guaranteed. Water derived from the capture of flash 
away. “What’s wrong, (c)Son?” asked his dad. Steven was 
floods is not subject to Islamic law as this constitutes an 
hesitant at first but soon disclosed his secret. After listening 
uncertain source, and is therefore free for those able to collect 
attentively to the end, his dad advised him to do the right thing.
and use it. However, this traditional allocation per unit of land 
has been bypassed, partly by the development of new supplies,  (D)
but  also  by  the (d)decrease  in  cultivation  of  a  crop  of 
Reading on, Steven realized the letter had been delivered 
substantial  economic  importance.  This  crop  is  harvested 
mistakenly. “Unfortunately,” it should have gone to Stephanie, 
throughout the year and thus requires more than its fair share 
who was the real winner. (d)He looked at the tickets and then 
of water. The economic status of the crop (e)ensures that water 
the letter. He had really wanted those tickets. He had planned 
rights can be bought or bribed away from subsistence crops.
to go there with his younger sister. Steven was his sister’s 
*irrigation: 관개(灌漑)    **bribe: 매수하다 hero, and he had bragged to her that he would win the contest. 
***subsistence crop: 생계용 작물 However, if she found out that her hero hadn’t won, she would 
be terribly disappointed, and (e)he would feel ashamed.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? *brag: 허풍 떨다
Water Rights No Longer Tied to Land
①
Strategies for Trading Water Rights (A)
② 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Water Storage Methods: Mountain vs. Desert
③ 가장 적절한 것은?
Water Supplies Not Stable in Mountain Regions
④ (B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
① － － ② － －
Unending Debates: Which Crop We Should Grow
⑤ (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③ － － ④ － －
(D) (C) (B)
⑤ － －
(a) (e)
42. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
것은?  [3점] (a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤  것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
“Congratulations!” That was the first word that Steven saw  Steven
① 은 집 앞 계단에 앉아 편지를 자세히 읽었다.
when he opened the envelope that his dad handed to him. He  Steven
② 방과 후에 집으로 돌아오는  의 발걸음은 무거웠다.
knew that he would win the essay contest. Overly excited, he  Steven
③ 아버지는  에게 옳은 일을 하라고 조언했다.
shouted,  “Hooray!”  At  that  moment,  two  tickets  to  Ace  Stephanie
④ 에세이 대회에서 우승한 사람은  였다.
Amusement Park, the prize, slipped out of the envelope. He  ⑤ Steven은 여동생과 놀이공원에 갈 계획이었다.
picked them up and read the letter thoroughly while sitting on 
the stairs in front of his house. “Wait a minute! That’s not my  *  확인 사항
name!” (a)he said, puzzled. The letter was addressed to his 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
classmate Stephanie, who had also participated in the contest.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2020학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Yes. The field trip was very exciting.
①
Really? I’ll go there tomorrow then.
②
Certainly. We’re very close friends.
③
Sorry. I was so busy last week.
④
Great! It’s going to be sunny.
⑤
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
①  블로그에 여행 계획 올리기 ②  방수 재킷 구입하기
Good idea. I’ll fix the fire alarm then.
① 
③  샌드위치 만들기 ④  낚싯대 장만하기 
Thank you. That would be really helpful.
② 
⑤  예약 확인하기
Never mind. I had breakfast this morning. 
③ 
Don’t worry. Let’s start exercising tomorrow.
④
I disagree. You can go to the train station by bus. 
⑤
8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 영화를 보러 갈 수 없는  이유를 고르시오. 
①  도서관에서 일을 해야 해서
②  역사 시험 준비를 해야 해서
3. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  ③  친구 생일 파티에 가야 해서 
고르시오.  ④  야구 경기를 보러 가야 해서
⑤  로봇 쇼에 참가해야 해서
① 졸업식 식순을 알려주려고
② 졸업 작품 전시회를 홍보하려고
③ 사진 강좌 수강생을 모집하려고
④ 학교 도서관 이용 방법을 안내하려고 9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
⑤ 졸업 사진 촬영 장소 변경을 공지하려고 $12 $19 $21 $22 $24
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
10. 대화를  듣고,  남자의  결혼식에  관해  언급되지  않은  것을 
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
고르시오.
① 직접 만든 생일 선물이 감동을 준다.
①  날짜 ②  장소 ③  식사 메뉴
② 생일 파티는 간소하게 하는 것이 바람직하다.
④  초대 인원 ⑤  특별 이벤트
③ 친구에게 주는 생일 선물로는 책이 유용하다.
④ 받고 싶은 생일 선물의 목록을 만드는 것이 좋다.
⑤ 생일 축하는 생일 전에 미리 하는 것이 의미가 있다. 
The International Air Show
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치
하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
10
①  개국이 참가할 것이다.
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
②  비행 공연 전에 사인 행사가 있을 것이다.
①  의사－환자 보호자 ②  담임교사－학부모 ③  방문객은 전시된 비행기 안에 들어갈 수 있다.
8
③  보험사 직원－고객 ④  축구 감독－신문 기자 ④  세 이하 어린이는 무료로 입장한다.
⑤  물리치료사－육상 선수 ⑤  무료 셔틀버스를 운행할 것이다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  여자가 구입할 스피커를 고르시오. 18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Portable Speakers
Model Price Weight Battery Life Design Dear New Members,
A $30 0.7kg 6hours Fabric
① Welcome to Rock Climbing Club and hope you will get 
B $40 0.5kg 10hours Fabric
② the most out of this rewarding sport. As beginners, you 
③ C $50 0.8kg 9hours Aluminum may be nervous in anticipation of your first climb. Many of 
④   D $55 1.4kg 10hours Fabric you have asked about what climbing equipment to buy, 
E $65 1.2kg 12hours Aluminum such as boots, ropes, helmets, and gloves. You don’t have 
⑤
to bother yourself with these concerns. We offer a special 
service that will rent you all the equipment you will ever 
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  need for climbing. The rental service is always available 
for our members. Just come on Saturday, ask for the rental 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
service, and be ready to have a fun climb. I look forward to 
Woman:
seeing you all this Saturday at 9 a.m. 
Don’t worry. I know that you’re very busy.
① 
Sincerely, 
That makes sense. I’ll focus on practicing the flute.
②  John B. Snyder
Definitely. I can help you become a great journalist. 
③ 
That’s too bad. I’m sure you’ll get elected next time.
④  ①  일시적으로 통제되는 등반 구간을 공지하려고
You’re right. I think I should leave the school orchestra.
⑤  ②  암벽 등반의 긍정적인 효과에 대해 설명하려고
③  암벽 등반을 위한 장비 대여에 대해 알려주려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  ④  암벽 등반 클럽의 회비 납부 방법을 통보하려고
⑤  암벽 등반에 필요한 안전 교육 일정을 안내하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Man: Rachel
19. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
No problem. I’ll inform my students about the quiz.
①  Rachel loved watching birds in the woods. However, she was 
②  Yes. I can’t wait to go to Thailand for my vacation. confined to the house because of a broken leg. She turned on 
Sure. I’ll try to find my pictures of Thai holidays. the TV but nothing was interesting. She tried to read a book but 
③ 
Of course. I’m sure you’re a very good cook. it was not fun at all. All she could do was sit, look at her broken 
④ 
Yeah. I bought an airline ticket for you. leg, and watch the clock. As she was listening to the dull 
⑤ 
tick-tock of the clock, her phone vibrated. It was a message 
with an audio file from her dad. As she opened it, a huge smile 
Ms. Green  Steven
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이 에게 할 말로 
spread across her face. Her dad had sent a recording of a little 
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] wren’s song her favorite bird song. Listening to the bright 
―
Ms. Green: warm sounds lifted her spirits and made her day more pleasant.
You’d better remove your personal information from the website. *wren: 굴뚝새
①
You should make sure the information you find online is correct. bored delighted confident nervous 
② ①  → ②  →
③ I think it’s important to meet the deadline of the presentation. ③  pleased → upset ④  frightened → relieved
calm annoyed
I’m worried that our presentation topic is inappropriate. ⑤  →
④
I’ll explain how to connect to the Internet in the office.
⑤
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Unless your company offers a class on how to give and 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
receive feedback, don’t assume those around you, including 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? your boss, know how to give negative feedback. They may be 
too aggressive. Too direct. Maybe even a little mean. Perhaps 
foods that fight against colds
① 
they are bad at giving feedback because no one ever taught 
preparing delicious cold foods
② 
them how. Or perhaps they’ve had bosses who were bad at 
effective foods for losing weight
③  giving them feedback. Try to brush aside the stuff that offends 
growing organic vegetables at home
④  or upsets you to really try to hear what they are saying you can 
bacteria that help the immune system
⑤  do better next time. And if they only tell you things like, 
“don’t let that happen again,” then work to figure out what 
17. 언급된 음식이 아닌  것은? you can do better next time, so that it doesn’t actually happen 
again. Preparing to solve a problem for next time feels better 
ginger mushrooms spinach
①  ②  ③  than getting upset about our failure to solve it this time.
yogurt garlic
④  ⑤ 
① 직장 상사와 동료에게 부정적인 피드백을 삼가야 한다.
② 실수를 반복하지 않으려면 모든 피드백을 수용해야 한다.
③ 효과적인 피드백 전달 방식에 관한 직원 교육이 필요하다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
④ 업무의 효율성을 높이려면 피드백을 신속하게 주고받아야 한다.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 부정적인 피드백에 불쾌해하지 말고 문제 해결에 향후 힘써야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
a cage model
21. 밑줄 친  이 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로 가장  23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
적절한 것은?  [3점] Libraries  are  becoming  increasingly  interested  in  the 
For  a  long  time,  tourism  was  seen  as  a  huge  monster  services they are providing for their users. This is an important 
invading the areas of indigenous peoples, introducing them to  focus especially  as  more  and  more  information  becomes 
―
the evils of the modern world. However, research has shown  available electronically. However, the traditional strengths of 
that this is not the correct way to perceive it. In most places,  libraries have always been their collections. This is true still 
tourists are welcome and indigenous people see tourism as a  today especially in research libraries. Also, collection makeup 
―
path  to  modernity  and  economic  development.  But  such  is the hardest thing to change quickly. For example, if a library 
development is always a two-edged sword. Tourism can mean  has a long tradition of heavily collecting materials published in 
progress, but most often also means the loss of traditions and  Mexico, then even if that library stops purchasing all Mexican 
cultural uniqueness. And, of course, there are examples of  imprints,  its  Mexican  collection  will  still  be  large  and 
‘cultural pollution’, ‘vulgarization’ and ‘phony-folk-cultures’.  impressive  for  several  years  to  come  unless  they  start 
The background for such characteristics is often more or less  withdrawing books. Likewise, if a library has not collected 
romantic and the normative ideas of a former or prevailing  much in a subject, and then decides to start collecting heavily 
authenticity. Ideally (to some) there should exist ancient cultures  in that area it will take several years for the collection to be 
for modern consumers to gaze at, or even step into for a while,  large enough and rich enough to be considered an important 
while travelling or on holiday. This is a cage model that is  research tool.
difficult to defend in a global world where we all, indigenous 
lasting significance of library collections even in the digital age 
①
or not, are part of the same social fabric. 
changing roles of local libraries and their effects on society
②
*indigenous: 토착의  **vulgarization: 상스럽게 함 ③ growing needs for analyzing a large volume of library data 
online services as a key to the success of research libraries
preserving a past culture in its original form for consumption ④
①
rare book collectors’ contributions to a library’s reputation
restoring local cultural heritages that have long been neglected ⑤
②
limiting public access to prehistoric sites for conservation
③
confining tourism research to authentic cultural traditions
④
maintaining a budget for cultural policies and regulations
⑤
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
While  genetic  advancements  are  often  reported  as 
From the late nineteenth century on, the dullness found in the 
environmentally  dependent  or  modest  in  effect  size  in 
senile, their isolation and withdrawal, their clinging to the past 
academic publications, these are often translated to the public 
and lack of interest in worldly affairs were characteristically 
in deterministic language through the media. Sociologists of 
represented as the symptoms of senility the social shame of the 
genetics argue that media portrayals of genetic influences on  ―
inevitable deterioration of the brain. Following World War II, 
health have increased considerably over time, becoming part 
academic discourse on aging typically represented these as the 
of the public discourse through which individuals understand 
causes of senility. The location of senile mental deterioration 
symptoms, make help-seeking decisions, and form views of 
was  no  longer  the  aging  brain  but  a  society  that,  through 
people with particular traits or conditions. The media is the 
involuntary retirement, social isolation, and the loosening of 
primary  source  of  information  about  genetic  advances  and 
traditional family ties, stripped the elderly of the roles that had 
their applications, but it does not provide a neutral discourse. 
sustained meaning in their lives. When elderly people were 
Rather,  information  is  selectively  included  or  ignored,  and 
deprived of these meaningful social roles, when they became 
scientific and clinical implications of genetic discoveries are 
increasingly isolated and were cut off from the interests and 
often inaccurate or overstated. This “genetic optimism” has 
activities that had earlier occupied them, not surprisingly their 
influenced public opinion, and research suggests that ordinary 
mental functioning deteriorated. The elderly did not so much 
people are largely accepting of genetic explanations for health 
lose their minds as lose their place.
and  behavior  and  tend  to  overestimate  the  heritability  of 
common diseases for biological relatives. *senile: 노쇠한  **deterioration: 노화 
Aged Mind in Concert with Aged Body: An Unfailing Truth
① 유전학자들의 편견과 낙관주의는 유전학의 발전을 저해한다. ①
No Change from Past to Present: Social Images of Old Age
② 성격이 낙천적인 사람들은 유전의 영향을 덜 받는 경향이 있다. ②
No Country for Old Men: Age Discrimination Intensified
③ 대중 매체는 건강에 관한 유전학의 성과를 부정확하게 전달한다. ③
What Makes the Elderly Decline: Being Left Out Socially
④ 유전학은 대중 매체를 통해 이해할 수 있는 학문이 아니다. ④
Not Disabled But Differently Abled: New Faces of Old Age
⑤ 유전학의 발전으로 건강에 관한 지식이 대중화되었다. ⑤
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
Glend High School’s Family Dinner & Dance
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 
Glend High School’s
Family Dinner & Dance
Join us at our annual event. Enjoy a fun evening with 
your family and make special lifelong memories! 
When: Saturday, September 7, 
?
6:00 p.m. 9:00 p.m.
?
Where: Glend High School Gym
?
   
Who: students and their family
?
Note: Respondents had to choose one of the three options listed above for 
(Students can invite up to four members of their family.)
each location. Due to rounding, the percentages may not sum to 100%.
Tickets: 
?
The  three  pie  charts  above  show  the  percentages  of  - must be purchased in advance at the student council office. 
American adults’ responses to a survey conducted in 2017.  - are $20 per student and $25 for each family member.
The survey asked whether people should be allowed to fly  - include dinner and a 4×6 photo of the family.
drones  at  three  locations:  public  parks,  beaches,  and  near  ?Dress Code: semi-formal for all participants 
people’s homes. ①While 44% of the respondents said people  ※There will be a photographer on site to take family photos.
should be allowed to fly drones in public parks, 25% said  For any questions, email us at glenddance@glendhs.edu.
people  should  not  be  allowed  to  do  so. When  asked  if 
②
people should be allowed to fly drones on beaches, 35% of the  ①  9월 7일에 세 시간 동안 진행된다. 
respondents said it should be allowed and 32% said it should  ②  학생은 자기 가족을 네 명까지 초대할 수 있다.
not. ③  More than half of the respondents said people should  ③  입장권은 학생회 사무실에서 사전에 구매해야 한다.
not be allowed to fly drones near people’s homes. ④Less  ④  참가자의 옷차림에 제약이 없다.
than 10% of the respondents said people should be allowed to  ⑤  가족사진을 찍어 줄 사진사가 현장에 있을 것이다. 
fly  drones  near  people’s  homes. For  each  of  the  three 
⑤
locations,  the  proportion  of  the  respondents  who  chose  “It 
2019 Astronomy & Night Sky Observations
depends” is above 30%. 28. 에 관한 다음 
안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은? 
2019 Astronomy & Night Sky Observations
New this autumn: discover the night sky from Mt. Hood! 
Before the night sky observations with telescopes, there 
will be a special lecture on astronomy. 
Program 
Carl Stokes
26. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Date: September 20
?
Born in 1927 in Cleveland, Ohio, Carl Stokes had a hard 
Special Lecture 
?
time early in his life. When he was a young child, his father 
- 9:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m.
?
died. As he grew up, he held many odd jobs to help his family. 
- Lecture Room # 101 in Mt. Hood Center 
Stokes graduated from Cleveland-Marshall College of Law 
(Seats are limited to 20.)
and passed the bar exam. He established a law firm in 1962. A 
Night Sky Observations
?
few years later, he ran for Mayor of Cleveland and lost, but he 
- 10:30 p.m. 11:30 p.m. in Mt. Hood Parking Lot # 5 
?
entered  the  race  again  in  the  next  election  and  won.  He 
Program Fee
became the first African-American mayor of the city. After 
- $10 per person (Children 12 and under are FREE.) 
retiring from politics, he moved to New York City and became 
Note
a TV news anchor. Later in his life, he was appointed the U.S. 
- You need to bring winter clothes because it can get 
Ambassador to the Republic of Seychelles. His amazing life 
extremely cold up on the mountain at night.
finally came to an end in his birth city in 1996.
①  어린아이였을 때 아버지가 돌아가셨다. ①  밤하늘 관찰 후 특강이 있을 것이다.
1962 30
②  년에 법률 회사를 설립했다.  ②  강의실 좌석은  개로 한정되어 있다.
Cleveland
③  재출마한    시장 선거에서 패배했다.  ③  밤하늘 관찰은 주차장에서 한다.
TV 12
④  정계 은퇴 후    뉴스 앵커가 되었다. ④  세 이하 어린이의 프로그램 참가비는 반값이다.
Seychelles 
⑤  공화국에 미국 대사로 임명되었다. ⑤  겨울옷은 가져올 필요가 없다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점] [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
To  begin  with  a  psychological  reason,  the  knowledge  of  31. When you begin to tell a story again that you have retold 
another’s  personal  affairs  can  tempt  the  possessor  of  this 
many times, what you retrieve from memory is the index to 
information ①to repeat it as gossip because as unrevealed  the story itself. That index can be embellished in a variety of 
information  it  remains  socially  inactive.  Only  when  the  ways. Over time, even the embellishments become standardized. 
information is repeated can its possessor  turn the fact that  An old man’s story that he has told hundreds of times shows 
②
he  knows  something  into  something  socially  valuable  like  little variation, and any variation that does exist becomes part 
social recognition, prestige, and notoriety. As long as he keeps  of the story itself, regardless of its origin. People add details to 
his information to  himself, he may feel superior to those  their stories that may or may not have occurred. They are 
③
who do not know it. But knowing and not telling does not  recalling indexes and reconstructing details. If at some point 
give him that feeling of “superiority that, so to say, latently  they add a nice detail, not really certain of its validity, telling 
contained in the secret, fully  actualizing itself only at the  the story with that same detail a few more times will ensure its 
④
moment of disclosure.” This is the main motive for gossiping  permanent place in the story index. In other words, the stories 
we tell time and again are  to the memory we 
about well-known figures and superiors. The gossip producer   
have of the events that the story relates. 
assumes that some of the “fame” of the subject of gossip, as 
⑤whose “friend” he presents himself, will rub off on him. *retrieve: 회수하다  **embellish: 윤색하다
*prestige: 명성  **notoriety: 악명  ***latently: 잠재적으로 ①  identical ②  beneficial ③  alien
prior neutral
④  ⑤ 
32. With  population  growth  slowing,  the  strongest  force 
increasing demand for more agricultural production will be 
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
rising  incomes,  which  are  desired  by  practically  all 
않은  것은?
governments and individuals. Although richer people spend 
One  misconception  that  often  appears  in  the  writings  of 
smaller  proportions  of  their  income  on  food,  in  total  they 
physical scientists who are looking at biology from the outside  consume more food and richer food, which contributes to 
―
is that the environment appears to them to be a static entity,  various kinds of disease and debilitation. The changes in 
which cannot contribute new bits of information as evolution  diet  that  usually  accompany  higher  incomes  will  require 
progresses. This, however, is by no means the case. Far from  relatively greater increases in the production of feed grains, 
being  static,  the  environment  is  constantly  changing  and  rather  than  food  grains,  as  foods  of  animal  origin  partly 
offering new  challenges to evolving populations. For higher  .  It  takes  two  to 
①
organisms, the most significant changes in the environment  six times more grain to produce food value through animals 
are those produced by the contemporaneous evolution of other  than to get the equivalent value directly from plants. It is thus 
organisms. The evolution of a horse’s hoof from a five-toed  quite credible to estimate that in order to meet economic and 
foot  has  enabled  the  horse  to  gallop  rapidly  over  open  social needs within the next three to five decades, the world 
②
should  be  producing  more  than  twice  as  much  grain  and 
plains. But such galloping is of no  advantage to a horse 
③
agricultural products as at present, but in ways that these are 
unless it is being chased by a predator. The horse’s efficient 
accessible to the food-insecure.
mechanism for running would never have evolved except for 
the  fact  that  meat-eating  predators  were  at  the  same  time  *debilitation: 건강 악화
evolving more efficient methods of  attack. Consequently, 
④ displace plant-based foods in people’s diets
① 
laws  based  upon  ecological  relationships  among  different 
demand eco-friendly processing systems
② 
kinds of organisms are  optional for understanding evolution 
⑤ cause several nutritional imbalances
③ 
and the diversity of life to which it has given rise. 
indicate the consumers’ higher social status
④   
*hoof: 발굽  **gallop: 질주하다  ***predator: 포식자  ⑤  play an important role in population growth
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. If one looks at the Oxford definition, one gets the sense that  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은? 
post-truth is not so much a claim that truth does not exist as 
Much of what we do each day is automatic and guided by 
that facts are subordinate to our political point of view. The 
habit, requiring little conscious awareness, and that’s not a bad 
Oxford definition focuses on “what” post-truth is: the idea that 
thing. As Duhigg explains, our habits are necessary mental 
feelings  sometimes  matter  more  than  facts.  But  just  as 
energy savers. We need to relieve our conscious minds so 
①
important is the next question, which is why this ever occurs. 
we can solve new problems as they come up. Once we’ve 
②
Someone  does  not  argue  against  an  obvious  or  easily 
solved the puzzle of how to ballroom dance, for example, we 
confirmable fact for no reason; he or she does so when it is to 
can do it by habit, and so be mentally freed to focus on a 
his or her advantage. When a person’s beliefs are threatened by 
conversation while dancing instead. But try to talk when 
an “inconvenient fact,” sometimes it is preferable to challenge  ③
first learning to dance the tango, and it’s a disaster we need 
the fact. This can happen at either a conscious or unconscious  ―
our  conscious  attention  to  focus  on  the  steps. Tango 
level (since sometimes the person we are seeking to convince  ④
musicians bring different genres of music together to attract a 
is  ourselves),  but  the  point  is  that  this  sort  of  post-truth 
more diverse audience from varying backgrounds. Imagine 
relationship to facts occurs only when we are seeking to assert  ⑤
how little we’d accomplish if we had to focus consciously on 
something 
.  [3점]
every behavior e.g., on where to place our feet for each step 
―
*subordinate: 종속하는 we take.
to hold back our mixed feelings 
① 
that balances our views on politics
② 
that leads us to give way to others in need
③ 
to carry the constant value of absolute truth
④ 
that is more important to us than the truth itself
⑤ 
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
34. The  debates  between  social  and  cultural  anthropologists 
A  sovereign  state  is  usually  defined  as  one  whose 
concern  not  the  differences  between  the  concepts  but  the 
citizens  are  free  to  determine  their  own  affairs  without 
analytical priority: which should come first, the social chicken 
or the cultural egg? British anthropology emphasizes the social.  interference from any agency beyond its territorial borders.
It assumes that social institutions determine culture and that 
(A) No citizen could be a full member of the community so 
universal domains of society (such as kinship, economy, politics, 
long as she was tied to ancestral traditions with which the 
and religion) are represented by specific institutions (such as the 
community might wish to break the problem of Antigone 
family, subsistence farming, the British Parliament, and the  ―
in Sophocles’ tragedy. Sovereignty and citizenship thus 
Church of England) which can be compared cross-culturally. 
require not only borders in space, but also borders in time.
American anthropology emphasizes the cultural. It assumes that 
culture  shapes  social  institutions  by  providing  the  shared  (B) Sovereignty and citizenship require freedom from the past 
beliefs, the core values, the communicative tools, and so on that  at least as much as freedom from contemporary powers. 
make social life possible. It does not assume that there are 
No state could be sovereign if its inhabitants lacked the 
universal  social  domains,  preferring  instead  to  discover 
ability  to  change  a  course  of  action  adopted  by  their 
domains  empirically  as  aspects  of  each  society’s  own 
forefathers in the past, or even one to which they once 
classificatory schemes in other words, its culture. And it 
― committed themselves.
rejects the notion that any social institution can be understood 
(C) But freedom in space (and limits on its territorial extent) is 
.
  [3점]
merely one characteristic of sovereignty. Freedom in time 
*anthropology: 인류학  **subsistence farming: 자급 농업 (and limits on its temporal extent) is equally important and 
***empirically: 경험적으로
probably more fundamental. 
[3점]
in relation to its cultural origin
① 
in isolation from its own context *sovereign: 주권의  **territorial: 영토의
② 
regardless of personal preferences (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③  ① － － ② － －
without considering its economic roots (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④  ③ － － ④ － －
on the basis of British-American relations  (C) (B) (A)
⑤  ⑤ － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.  
Because a main goal of science is to discover lawful  So, there was a social pressure for art to come up with 
relationships, science assumes that what is being investigated  some vocation that both distinguished it from science and, 
is lawful. For example, the chemist assumes that chemical  at the same time, made it equal in stature to science. 
reactions are lawful, and the physicist assumes that the 
physical world is lawful. Representational theories of art treat the work of the artist as 
similar to that of the scientist. Both, so to speak, are involved in 
(A) The determinist, then, assumes that everything that occurs 
describing the external world. ( ) But by the nineteenth 
①
is a function of a finite number of causes and that, if these 
century, any comparison between the scientist and the artist 
causes  were  known,  an  event  could  be  predicted  with 
was bound to make the artist look like a poor relation in terms 
complete accuracy. However, knowing all causes of an 
of making discoveries about the world or holding a mirror up to 
event is not necessary; the determinist simply assumes 
nature. ( ) Here, science clearly had the edge. ( ) The 
② ③
that  they  exist  and  that  as  more  causes  are  known, 
notion that art specialized in the expression of the emotions 
predictions become more accurate.
was particularly attractive in this light. ( ) It rendered unto 
④
(B) The assumption that what is being studied can be understood 
science its own the exploration of the objective world while 
― ―
in  terms  of  causal  laws  is  called  determinism.  Richard 
saving  something  comparably  important  for  art  to  do to 
Taylor defined determinism as the philosophical doctrine  ―
explore the inner world of feeling. ( ) If science held the 
that “states that for everything that ever happens there are  ⑤
mirror up to nature, art turned a mirror at the self and its 
conditions such that, given them, nothing else could happen.”
experiences.
  [3점]
(C) For example, almost everyone would agree that the weather 
is a function of a finite number of variables such as sunspots,  *vocation: 소명  **stature: 수준  ***render: 주다
high-altitude  jet  streams,  and  barometric  pressure;  yet 
weather forecasts are always probabilistic because many of  (A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  , 
these variables change constantly, and others are simply 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
unknown.
*altitude: 고도(高度)    **barometric: 기압의 Over the past few decades, architecture as an idea and 
practice has increasingly limited its definition of itself. In 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
① － － ② － －
the foreseeable future, the instrumentality of architecture in 
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③ － － ④ － －
effecting actual change that is, change that challenges 
(C) (B) (A) ―
⑤ － －
the dominance of commercial institutions, their aims, and 
values will diminish. While the present day seems to be 
―
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
a time of unparalleled innovation and freedom of choice, 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
the reality is that architectural styles and forms are often the 
38. attractive packaging and repackaging of the same proven, 
marketable  concepts.  The  speed  with  which  “radical” 
The field of international politics is, however, dominated 
designs  by  celebrity  architects  achieve  acceptance  and 
by states and other powerful actors (such as multinational 
popularity demonstrates that formal innovation has itself 
corporations) that have priorities other than human rights.  
become an important commodity. However, beneath the 
There is obviously a wide gap between the promises of the  cloak of radicalism, the conventions of existing building 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 and the real  typologies  and  programs,  with  all  their  comforting 
world of human-rights violations. In so far as we sympathize  familiarity, still rule and sell. What is needed desperately 
―
with the victims, we may criticize the UN and its member  today  are  approaches  to  architecture  that  can  free  its 
governments  for  failing  to  keep  their  promises.  ( )  potential to transform our ways of thinking and acting.
①
However, we cannot understand the gap between human-rights 
*cloak: 망토  **typology: 유형학
ideals  and  the  real  world  of  human-rights  violations  by  ??
sympathy  or  by  legal  analysis.  ( )  Rather,  it  requires 
②
investigation by the various social sciences of the causes of  Seemingly  innovative,  architecture  has  actually  become 
social conflict and political oppression, and of the interaction  (A)   in  its  own  convention  and  commercialized 
between  national  and  international  politics.  ( ③ )  The  UN  environment, so efforts should be made to  (B)  its 
introduced the concept of human rights into international law 
power to change us.
and politics. ( ) It is a leading feature of the human-rights 
④
field that the governments of the world proclaim human rights  (A) (B) (A) (B)
but have a highly variable record of implementing them. ( )  fixed share trapped activate
⑤ ① …… ② ……
We must understand why this is so. standardized control localized share
③ …… ④ ……
*oppression: 억압 ⑤ underestimated …… activate
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
While  they  were  enjoying  dessert,  a  server  approached 
Much of our knowledge of the biology of the oceans is 
them  and  asked,  “Excuse  me,  who  is  Nancy  Holloway 
derived from “blind” sampling. We use instruments to measure 
between the two of you?” “I am,” answered Nancy with a 
bulk  properties  of  the  environment,  such  as  salinity  and 
curious  look.  Then  he  gave  a  lovely  bouquet  of  roses  to 
temperature, and we use bottle or net samples to (a)extract 
Nancy,  saying,  “This  gift  is  from  your  daughter.  (b)She 
knowledge about the organisms living in the ocean. This kind 
called yesterday and asked us to prepare this celebration for 
of approach has contributed important knowledge but has also 
you.” Surprised, she looked at her smiling daughter. Carol 
influenced the way we view marine life. It leads us to focus on 
winked  and  said,  “(c)You  deserve  this  and  more,  Mom. 
abundances, production rates, and distribution patterns. Such a 
Thank you for everything you have ever done for me.”
perspective is very (b)relevant in the context of the ocean as a 
resource  for  fisheries.  It  is  also  helpful  in  developing  an  (C)
understanding of biogeochemical issues such as ocean carbon 
When at last they arrived at the restaurant, to make matters 
fluxes. But on its own, this approach is (c)insufficient, even 
worse, they were charged three times more than the usual 
for those purposes. The kind of intuition that we develop 
fare due to the heavy traffic. Yet a happy turn of events was 
about marine life is, of course, influenced by the way we  waiting for them. The restaurant was fantastic and all the 
(d)observe it. Because the ocean is inaccessible to us and most  staff  were  very  polite  and  kind.  The  French  cuisine  was 
planktonic organisms are microscopic, our intuition is elementary  delicious. “This is the best food (d)I have ever had! I will 
compared, for example, to the intuitive understanding we have  never  forget  this  dinner  with  you,”  said  Nancy,  thanking 
about (macroscopic) terrestrial life. Our understanding of the  Carol for another surprise gift.
biology  of  planktonic  organisms  is  still  based  mainly  on 
(D)
examinations  of  (dead)  individuals,  field  samples,  and 
incubation  experiments,  and  even  our  sampling  may  be  As  the  sky  grew  dark,  Carol  hurried  because  she  had 
severely biased toward those organisms that are not destroyed  prepared another secret surprise for Nancy. “Mom, let’s go 
by  our  harsh  sampling  methods.  Similarly,  experimental  enjoy our dinner before it gets too late. I reserved a table at a 
observations are (e)extended to those organisms that we can  French restaurant for (e)you.” Their pleasant evening, however, 
collect live and keep and cultivate in the laboratory.  was unexpectedly interrupted as they waited to get a taxi. It 
took them a really long time to catch one. Even after they 
 *salinity: 염도  **flux: 흐름  ***terrestrial: 육지의 finally got in, the taxi got caught in heavy traffic. They were 
late for their reservation.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
①  The Blind Spot in the Research of Ocean Biology 43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
The Ocean under the Microscope: A Breakthrough
②  가장 적절한 것은?
What Ocean Research Needs: Pattern Recognition
③  (B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
① － － ② － －
Intuition vs. Experiment: Issues in Ocean Biology
④  (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③ － － ④ － －
Plankton Destroyed, Oceans Endangered
⑤  (D) (C) (B)
⑤ － －
(a) (e)
42. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은  (a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?  [3점]
것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤  (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
(A)
Nancy Carol
①  와  은 에펠탑에서 석양을 바라보았다. 
Nancy and her daughter, Carol, were at the Eiffel Tower, as  Carol Nancy
②  은  에게 꽃다발을 직접 전달했다. 
the sun was setting over Paris. The sunset that they saw was 
③  레스토랑의 직원들은 모두 예의 바르고 친절했다. 
beyond description. “Thank you, Carol. I can’t believe I am  Carol Nancy
④  은  를 위해 깜짝 선물을 다양하게 준비했다. 
in Paris with you. It has been my lifelong dream to visit this  Nancy Carol
⑤  와  은 예약한 저녁 식사 시간에 늦었다.
beautiful city.” Nancy thanked her daughter for this special 
trip that she had prepared in secret. Their trip to France was 
Carol’s surprise gift for the sixtieth birthday of her mother
― *  확인 사항
a  woman  who  had  sacrificed  all  (a)her  life  for  her  only 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
daughter. 
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2020학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
They’ll let me know in a week.
①
I’m excited to watch the musical.
②
I posted the results on the website.
③
I finally got the main role I wanted.
④
They’ll start the audition in 10 minutes.
⑤
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Absolutely. You don’t need it tomorrow.
①
①  행사 광고지 인쇄하기
Alright. I’ll return it to you this evening.
②
②  행사용 선물 주문하기
I know. But I haven’t fixed mine yet.
③
③  사인회 작가에게 연락하기
Don’t worry. You can repair it easily.
④
④  할인 행사용 도서 진열하기
Sorry. I couldn’t go to the workshop.
⑤
⑤  회원에게 문자 메시지 보내기
8. 대화를  듣고,  여자가  농구  경기를  보러  가지  못한  이유를 
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
고르시오.
①  야근을 해야 했기 때문에
①  회사 발전 계획을 발표하려고
②  티켓이 매진되었기 때문에
②  직원 연수 일정을 안내하려고
③  딸을 돌보아야 했기 때문에
③  우수 직원상 신청을 권장하려고
④  경기 일정이 변경되었기 때문에
④  신입 사원 세미나를 공지하려고
⑤  갑자기 출장을 가야 했기 때문에
⑤  직장 근무 환경 개선을 촉구하려고
9. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$36 $40 $45 $50 $60
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  글씨체를 통해 사람의 성격을 파악할 수 있다.
10. 대화를  듣고,  학생회장  선거에  관해  언급되지  않은  것을 
②  컴퓨터 사용이 고객 관리에 도움이 된다.
고르시오. 
③  손으로 쓴 편지는 사람을 감동시킨다.
④  신뢰 관계는 좋은 첫인상에서 비롯된다. ①  선거 일자 ②  후보자 공약 ③  후보 자격
⑤  글쓰기 능력은 꾸준한 노력을 통해 향상된다. ④  연설 장소 ⑤  투표 방법
Sunstone City Library
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 않는  것을 고르시오. 
8 5
①  화가－패션모델  ①  월  일에 개관한다.
Kingsbury Museum
②  소설가－출판업자 ②  을 설계한 건축가가 설계했다.
③  사진작가－요리사 ③  가상현실 기기를 무료로 사용할 수 있다.
Sunstone City
④  영화감독－만화가 ④  에서 가장 많은 도서를 보유하고 있다.
⑤  작곡가－신문 기자 ⑤  개관일에 방문객에게 선물을 줄 예정이다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 주문할 그림 액자를  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
고르시오. Dear Future Pilots,
Picture Frames
We are very excited to announce that we will offer the 
Model Price Material  Color Free Gift Summer Aviation Flight Camp for student pilot certificates. 
It will be held from July 20 to August 3, 2019 at O’Ryan 
A $30 Paper Gold Picture Key Ring
① Flight School. The summer camp will include programs 
B $33 Ceramic White Picture Key Ring
② in which participants can receive flight instruction from 
③ C $42 Aluminum Silver Picture Magnet professional pilots, go on field trips, try flight simulators, 
D $35 Bamboo Brown Picture Magnet and do a lot more. Because of the aviation regulation for 
④
student pilots, the camp is limited to participants over 16 
E $28 Plastic Blue Picture Key Ring
⑤
years old. Please see the attached document for registration 
and tuition information. If you have further questions about 
13. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  the camp, please contact the coordinator at 714-3127-1004. 
Sincerely,
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Todd O’Ryan 
Man:
Director
Thanks a lot. I hope he can help me out.
① 
②  No thanks. He’s the last man I want to see. ①  항공 비행 캠프 변경 사항을 알리려고 
Trust me. I’ll keep the sound system updated. ②  항공 비행 캠프 개최에 대해 안내하려고
③ 
That’s fine. You’ll learn from your experience. ③  항공 조종사 자격시험 장소를 공지하려고 
④ 
④  항공 조종사 면허 신청 방법을 설명하려고
Cheer up! You’ll get another chance next time.
⑤ 
⑤  항공 비행 캠프 참여자 선정 결과를 통보하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  19. 다음 글에 드러난 Claire의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] It  was  two  hours  before  the  paper  submission.  With  the 
Woman: deadline close at hand, Claire was still struggling with her 
writing. Pressed for time and stuck in a deadlock, she had no 
Okay. I’ll ask her to buy some shrimp on her way home.
① idea how to finish the paper. She wasn’t even sure whether she 
Great idea. Turkey sandwiches are always my favorite.
② could submit it on time. What she found in her paper was 
③ Yes. I’ll take the shrimp pasta to her workplace now. scribbled words, half sentences, and a pile of seemingly strange 
Good. Let me recommend several good restaurants. and disjointed ideas. “Nothing makes sense,” she said to herself. 
④
No wonder. She took the day off from work today. She looked at her writing and began reading it over and over. 
⑤
All of a sudden and unexpectedly, something was found in 
that pile of thoughts: the flow and connection of ideas she had 
Peter Peter
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  의 할머니에게 할 말로 
not considered while she was writing. From this moment, the 
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] ticking of the clock sounded encouraging to her. “Yes, I can do 
Peter: it!” Claire said as she grabbed her pencil again.
① I’m worried that you use your smartphone too much. *scribble: 휘갈겨 쓰다
② Let me explain how to download apps on your phone. ① delighted → ashamed ② relieved → worried 
Why don’t you share your photos with your classmates? nervous confident indifferent excited
③ ③ → ④ →
④ How about taking a smartphone class at the senior center? ⑤ bored → embarrassed
I’d better buy you a new smartphone with a larger screen.
⑤
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Learning  a  certain  concept  such  as  “molecules”  requires 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. more than just a single exposure to the idea. If a student is 
going  to  remember  a  science  concept,  he  or  she  should 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
experience it multiple times and in various contexts. That is 
unique museums around the world
① one of the strengths of the learning cycle: the students have 
② the history of world-class museums direct experience with the concept, then they talk about it, and 
cultural festivals in different countries then they have even more direct experience. Reading, watching 
③
worldwide efforts to preserve heritage videos, and listening to others’ thoughts contribute to a more 
④
solid understanding of the concept. This suggests more than 
international etiquette of museum visitors
⑤
repetition.  Each  event  allows  the  student  to  examine  the 
concept from a different perspective. Ultimately this will lead 
17. 언급된 나라가 아닌  것은? to a substantive, useful understanding of the complexities and 
USA Egypt India nuances of the concept. 
①  ②  ③ 
Japan Mexico
④  ⑤ 
① 과학 개념을 학습하려면 다양한 방식으로 여러 번 접해야 한다.
② 복잡한 과학 개념을 이해하기 위해서는 암기가 선행되어야 한다.
③ 효과적인 과학 학습을 위해 기본 개념을 숙지할 필요가 있다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
④ 과학 원리는 쉬운 것부터 어려운 것 순으로 가르쳐야 한다. 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 다양한 시각 자료를 활용하여 과학 수업을 진행해야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
Garbage in, garbage out
21. 밑줄 친 “ ”이 다음 글에서 의미하는  23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
바로 가장 적절한 것은? In the twelfth to thirteenth centuries there appeared the first 
Many  companies  confuse  activities  and  results.  As  a  manuals teaching “table manners” to the offspring of aristocrats. 
consequence, they make the mistake of designing a process  It was a genre that subsequently had a great success in the 
that sets out milestones in the form of activities that must be  early modern period with The Courtier by Baldassare Castiglione, 
carried out during the sales cycle. Salespeople have a genius  The  Galateo  by  Monsignor  Della  Casa,  and  many  others 
for doing what’s compensated rather than what’s effective. If  produced in different European countries. In a variety of ways 
your  process  has  an  activity  such  as  “submit  proposal”  or  and meanings, these are all instruments intended to define or 
“make cold call,” then that’s just what your people will do. No  distinguish who is in from who is out, separating the participants 
matter  that  the  calls  were  to  the  wrong  customer  or  went  from the ostracized. It is for this reason that manuals of “good 
nowhere. No matter that the proposal wasn’t submitted at the  manners” addressed to the aristocracy always have a negative 
right point in the buying decision or contained inappropriate  reference  to  the  peasant  who  behaves  badly,  who  “doesn’t 
information. The process asked for activity, and activity was  know” what the rules are, and for this reason is excluded from 
what  it  got.  Salespeople  have  done  what  was  asked  for.  the lordly table. Food etiquette had become a sign of social 
“Garbage in, garbage out” they will delight in telling you. “It’s  barriers and of the impossibility of breaking them down.
not our problem, it’s this dumb process.” 
*aristocrat: 귀족  **ostracize: 추방하다
In seeking results, compensation is the key to quality.
① table manners as a marker for class distinction
①
Salespeople should join in a decision-making process.
② publications to bring about equality between classes
②
Shared understanding does not always result in success.
③ unintended effects of distinguishing insiders from outsiders
③
Activities drawn from false information produce failure.
④ attempts to elaborate food etiquette for educational purposes
④
Processes focused on activities end up being ineffective.
⑤ roles of manners in uniting people from different backgrounds
⑤
24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?  Racial and ethnic relations in the United States are better 
The  twenty-first  century  is  the  age  of  information  and  today than in the past, but many changes are needed before 
knowledge. It is a century that is characterized by knowledge as  sports are a model of inclusion and fairness. The challenges 
the important resource that gains competitive advantage for  today are different from the ones faced twenty years ago, and 
companies. To acquire all these knowledge and information,  experience shows that when current challenges are met, a new 
organizations must rely on the data that they store. Data, the  social situation is created in which new challenges emerge. 
basic element, is gathered daily from different input sources.  For example, once racial and ethnic segregation is eliminated 
Information is extracted or learned from these sources of data,  and people come together, they must learn to live, work, and 
and this captured information is then transformed into knowledge  play with each other despite diverse experiences and cultural 
that is eventually used to trigger actions or decisions. By and  perspectives. Meeting this challenge requires a commitment to 
large, organizations do not have any problem of not having  equal treatment, plus learning about the perspectives of others, 
enough data because most organizations are rich with data. The  understanding how they define and give meaning to the world, 
problem  however  is  that  many  organizations  are  poor  in  and then determining how to form and maintain relationships 
information and knowledge. This fact translates into one of the  while  respecting  differences,  making  compromises,  and 
biggest challenges faced by organizations: how to transform raw  supporting one another in the pursuit of goals that may not 
data into information and eventually into knowledge, which if  always be shared. None of this is easy, and challenges are 
exploited correctly provides the capabilities to predict customers’  never met once and for all time.
behaviour and business trends. *segregation: 분리
On-going Challenges in Sports: Racial and Ethnic Issues
① 고객의 특성은 기업의 데이터 처리 과정에서 주요 고려 사항이다. ① 
Racial and Ethnic Injustice in Sports: Cause and Effect
② 성공하는 기업은 사실에 기반한 판단을 통해 위기를 극복한다. ② 
The History of Racial and Ethnic Diversity in Sports
③ 기업 경쟁력은 데이터를 정보와 지식으로 변환하는 능력에서 나온다. ③ 
All for One, One for All: The Power of Team Sports
④ 지식 정보화 시대에는 기초 데이터 확보의 중요성이 커지고 있다. ④ 
Cooperation Lies at the Heart of Sportsmanship
⑤ 데이터의 가치는 그것이 가지는 잠재적 수익성에 의해 결정된다. ⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
2019 Fitness EXPO
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
않는  것은?
2019 Fitness EXPO
The 2019 Fitness EXPO is an annual event where you 
can experience new wellness products and enjoy fitness 
classes, competitions, and a lot more. 
Dates & Time: June 22-23, 2019, 10:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m.
Place: Healfit Convention Hall 
Admission: One-day Pass $10 / Two-day Pass $18 
(Ages 12 and under enter for FREE.) 
The graph above shows the average kilocalorie intake from  Accommodations
sugar-sweetened beverages by age group and gender on a given  Healfit Hotel offers rooms at a special rate. Please book 
day during 2011-2014 in the United States. In each age  your stay at www.healfithotel.com.
①
group,  males  had  higher  average  kilocalorie  intake  from  Activities
sugar-sweetened beverages than females did. ②Among the  ?Fitness Classes led by professional trainers
Arm Wrestling Tournament, where the champion is given 
male groups, the group aged 20-39 had the highest average  ?
a trophy
kilocalorie intake from sugar-sweetened beverages. Among 
③ Dance Fitness Contest, where only amateurs can participate
?
the  female  groups,  the  group  aged  12-19  had  the  highest 
For further information, visit our website at www.ibeingfit.com.
average  kilocalorie  intake  from  sugar-sweetened  beverages, 
followed by the group aged 20-39. Among the male groups, 
④ 
the group aged 2-5 had the lowest average kilocalorie intake  ①  새로 나온 건강 제품을 체험할 수 있다.
12
②  세 이하는 무료입장이다. 
from sugar-sweetened beverages.  Among the female groups, 
⑤  Healfit Hotel
③  이 객실을 특별가로 제공한다.
likewise, the youngest group had the lowest average kilocalorie 
④  팔씨름 토너먼트 챔피언에게는 트로피가 수여된다.
intake from sugar-sweetened beverages.
⑤  댄스 피트니스 경연은 전문가들이 참가할 수 있다. 
2019 Mountain Today Wildflower Photo Contest
28. 에  관한 
다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
2019 Mountain Today Wildflower Photo Contest
Mountain Today is hosting a photo contest for local high 
school students. We want to see your best wildflower photos. 
Great Bear Rainforest
26. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 
No Entry Fee
?
않는  것은? Submission Deadline: 18:00 on June 7, 2019
?
Along the coast of British Columbia lies a land of forest  How to Submit: Upload to www.mountaintoday.com. 
?
green  and  sparkling  blue.  This  land  is  the  Great  Bear  Submission Categories
▣
Rainforest, which measures 6.4 million hectares about the  People with Wildflowers
― ?
Landscape with Wildflowers
size of Ireland or Nova Scotia. It is home to a wide variety of  ?
wildlife. One of the unique animals living in the area is the  Prizes
▣
First Place: $200 for one person from each category 
Kermode bear. It is a rare kind of bear known to be the official  ?
Second Place: $100 for one person from each category 
mammal of British Columbia. Salmon are also found here.  ?
Winners will be posted on the website on June 21, 2019. 
?
They play a vital role in this area’s ecosystem as a wide range 
Individual notifications will also be issued to winners.
of animals, as well as humans, consume them. The Great Bear 
Details
Rainforest is also home to the Western Red Cedar, a tree that  ▣
All photos should be uploaded in JPEG format. 
?
can  live  for  several  hundred  years.  The  tree’s  wood  is 
No photo editing is allowed.
?
lightweight and rot-resistant, so it is used for making buildings  The total number of photos submitted is limited to four 
?
and furniture. per student. 
British Columbia
①  의 해안가를 따라 위치한다.
①  참가비가 있다.
Ireland Nova Scotia
②  와  를 합친 크기이다.
②  출품 분야는 세 가지이다.
Kermode
③    곰이 살고 있다.
③  입상자들에게 개별 통지는 하지 않을 것이다.
④  연어는 이 지역 생태계에서 중요한 역할을 한다. ④  사진 편집이 허용되지 않는다.
Western Red Cedar 1
⑤  의 서식지이다. ⑤  학생  인당 출품 사진 수에 제한이 없다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점] [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
An interesting aspect of human psychology is that we tend to  31. Some people have defined wildlife damage management as 
like things more and find them more appealing if everything 
① the science and management of overabundant species, but this 
about those things is not obvious the first time we experience  definition is too narrow. All wildlife species act in ways that 
them. This is certainly true in music. For example, we might  harm human interests. Thus, all species cause wildlife damage, 
hear a song on the radio for the first time that catches our interest  not just overabundant ones. One interesting example of this 
and decide we like it. Then the next time we hear it, we hear  involves  endangered peregrine  falcons  in  California,  which 
②
a lyric we didn’t catch the first time, or we might notice what  prey on another endangered species, the California least tern. 
③
the piano or drums are doing in the background. A special  Certainly, we would not consider peregrine falcons as being 
harmony emerges that we missed before. We hear more and  overabundant, but we wish that they would not feed on an 
④
more  and  understand  more  and  more  with  each  listening.  endangered species. In this case, one of the negative values 
Sometimes, the longer that takes for a work of art to reveal  associated  with  a  peregrine  falcon  population  is  that  its 
⑤
all of its subtleties to us, the more fond of that thing whether  predation  reduces  the  population  of  another  endangered 
―
species. The goal of wildlife damage management in this case 
it’s music, art, dance, or architecture we become.
―
would be to stop the falcons from eating the terns without 
*subtleties: 중요한 세부 요소[사항]들  the falcons.
 
*peregrine falcon: 송골매  **least tern: 작은 제비갈매기
cloning harming training
①  ②  ③ 
overfeeding domesticating
④  ⑤ 
32. Through recent decades academic archaeologists have been 
urged to conduct their research and excavations according to 
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
hypothesis-testing procedures. It has been argued that we should 
않은  것은?
construct our general theories, deduce testable propositions and 
Sometimes the awareness that one is distrusted can provide 
prove or disprove them against the sampled data. In fact, the 
the necessary incentive for self-reflection. An employee who  application of this ‘scientific method’ often ran into difficulties. 
①realizes  she  isn’t  being  trusted  by  her  co-workers  with  The data have a tendency to lead to unexpected questions, 
shared responsibilities at work might, upon reflection, identify  problems and issues. Thus, archaeologists claiming to follow 
areas where she has consistently let others down or failed to  hypothesis-testing procedures found themselves having to create 
follow through on previous commitments. Others’ distrust of  a fiction. In practice, their work and theoretical conclusions 
her might then  forbid her to perform her share of the duties  partly developed  . 
②
in a way that makes her more worthy of their trust. But distrust  In other words, they already knew the data when they decided 
of one who is  sincere in her efforts to be a trustworthy and  upon an interpretation. But in presenting their work they rewrote 
③
dependable person can be disorienting and might cause her to  the script, placing the theory first and claiming to have tested it 
doubt her own perceptions and to distrust herself. Consider,  against data which they discovered, as in an experiment under 
laboratory conditions.
for instance, a teenager whose parents are  suspicious and 
④
distrustful when she goes out at night; even if she has been  *excavation: 발굴  **deduce: 추론하다
forthright  about  her  plans  and  is  not  breaking  any 
⑤ from the data which they had discovered
①
agreed-upon rules, her identity as a respectable moral subject 
from comparisons of data in other fields
②
is undermined by a pervasive parental attitude that expects 
to explore more sites for their future studies
③
deceit and betrayal. 
by supposing possible theoretical frameworks
④
*forthright: 솔직한,  거리낌 없는  **pervasive: 널리 스며 있는 ⑤ by observing the hypothesis-testing procedures
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. Digital  technology  accelerates  dematerialization  by  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
hastening the migration from products to services. The liquid 
When a dog is trained to detect drugs, explosives, contraband, 
nature  of  services  means  they  don’t  have  to  be  bound  to 
or other items, the trainer doesn’t actually teach the dog how 
materials. But dematerialization is not just about digital goods. 
to smell; the dog already knows how to discriminate one scent 
The reason even solid physical goods like a soda can can 
― ― from another. Rather, the dog is trained to become emotionally 
deliver more benefits while inhabiting less material is because 
aroused by one smell versus another. In the step-by-step 
①
their  heavy  atoms  are  substituted  by  weightless  bits.  The 
training process, the trainer attaches an “emotional charge” to 
tangible  is  replaced  by  intangibles intangibles  like  better 
―
a particular scent so that the dog is drawn to it above all 
design, innovative processes, smart chips, and eventually online 
others. And then the dog is trained to search out the desired 
connectivity that do the work that more aluminum atoms  ②
―
item  on  cue,  so  that  the  trainer  can  control  or  release  the 
used to do. Soft things, like intelligence, are thus embedded into 
behavior. This emotional arousal is also why playing tug 
hard things, like aluminum, that make hard things behave more  ③
with a dog is a more powerful emotional reward in a training 
like software. Material goods infused with bits increasingly act 
regime than just giving a dog a food treat, since the trainer 
as if   Nouns morph to verbs. 
.
invests more emotion into a game of tug. As long as the 
Hardware behaves like software. In Silicon Valley they say it  ④
trainer gives the dog a food reward regularly, the dog can 
like this: “Software eats everything.”
  [3점]
understand its “good” behavior results in rewards. From a 
⑤
*morph: 변화하다
dog’s point of view, the tug toy is compelling because the 
①  they were intangible services trainer is “upset” by the toy.
they replaced all digital goods 
②  contraband:  tug: 
* 밀수품  ** 잡아당김
hardware could survive software 
③ 
digital services were not available
④ 
software conflicted with hardware
⑤ 
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Notation was more than a practical method for preserving 
34. Not all Golden Rules are alike; two kinds emerged over  an expanding repertoire of music. 
time.  The  negative  version  instructs  restraint;  the  positive 
(A) Written notes freeze the music rather than allowing it to 
encourages intervention. One sets a baseline of at least not 
develop in the hands of individuals, and it discourages 
causing harm; the other points toward aspirational or idealized 
improvisation. Partly because of notation, modern classical 
beneficent behavior. While examples of these rules abound, too 
performance lacks the depth of nuance that is part of aural 
many to list exhaustively, let these versions suffice for our 
purpose here: “What is hateful to you do not do to another” and  tradition. Before notation arrived, in all history music was 
“Love another as yourself.” Both versions insist on caring for  largely carried on as an aural tradition. 
others, whether through acts of omission, such as not injuring, or 
(B) It changed the nature of the art itself. To write something 
through acts of commission, by actively intervening. Yet while 
down means that people far away in space and time can 
these Golden Rules encourage an agent to care for an other, 
re-create it. At the same time, there are downsides. 
they  . 
(C) Most  world  music  is  still  basically  aural,  including 
The purposeful displacement of concern away from the ego 
sophisticated musical traditions such as Indian and Balinese. 
nonetheless remains partly self-referential. Both the negative 
Most jazz musicians can read music but often don’t bother, 
and the positive versions invoke the ego as the fundamental 
measure against which behaviors are to be evaluated.  and their art is much involved with improvisation. Many 
[3점]
modern pop musicians, one example being Paul McCartney, 
*an other: 타자(他者)
can’t read music at all.
do not lead the self to act on concerns for others
①
reveal inner contradiction between the two versions *improvisation: 즉흥 연주  **aural: 청각의
②
fail to serve as a guide when faced with a moral dilemma (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ ① － － ② － －
do not require abandoning self-concern altogether (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ ③ － － ④ － －
hardly consider the benefits of social interactions (C) (B) (A)
⑤ ⑤ － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.
Marshall McLuhan, among others, noted that clothes are  That puts you each near a focus, a special point at which 
people’s extended skin, wheels extended feet, camera and  the sound of your voice gets focused as it reflects off the 
passageway’s curved walls and ceiling.
telescopes extended eyes. Our technological creations are 
great extrapolations of the bodies that our genes build. 
Whispering galleries are remarkable acoustic spaces found 
beneath certain domes or curved ceilings. A famous one is 
(A) The blueprints for our shells spring from our minds, which 
located outside a well-known restaurant in New York City’s 
may spontaneously create something none of our ancestors 
Grand Central Station. ( ) It’s a fun place to take a date: 
①
ever made or even imagined. If technology is an extension 
the two of you can exchange romantic words while you’re 
of humans, it is not an extension of our genes but of our 
forty feet apart and separated by a busy passageway. ( ) 
②
minds. Technology is therefore the extended body for ideas. You’ll hear each other clearly, but the passersby won’t hear a 
word you’re saying. ( ) To produce this effect, the two of 
(B) In this way, we can think of technology as our extended  ③
you should stand at diagonally opposite corners of the space, 
body. During the industrial age it was easy to see the world 
facing  the  wall.  ( )  Ordinarily,  the  sound  waves  you 
this way. Steam-powered shovels, locomotives, television,  ④
produce travel in all directions and bounce off the walls at 
and the levers and gears of engineers were a fabulous 
different times and places, scrambling them so much that they 
exoskeleton that turned man into superman.
are inaudible when they arrive at the ear of a listener forty feet 
(C) A closer look reveals the flaw in this analogy: The extended  away. ( ) But when you whisper at a focus, the reflected 
⑤
costume of animals is the result of their genes. They inherit  waves  all  arrive  at  the  same  time  at  the  other  focus,  thus 
the basic blueprints of what they make. Humans don’t. reinforcing one another and allowing your words to be heard.
  [3점]  
*extrapolation: 연장(延長)    **exoskeleton: 외골격  ***flaw: 결함 [3점]
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) *acoustic: 음향의  **diagonally: 대각선으로
① － － ② － －
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③ － － ④ － －
⑤ (C) － (B) －(A) 40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸 (A), 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
After the United Nations environmental conference in 
Rio  de  Janeiro  in  1992  made  the  term  “sustainability” 
widely  known  around  the  world,  the  word  became  a 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
popular  buzzword  by  those  who  wanted  to  be  seen  as 
적절한 곳을 고르시오. pro-environmental but who did not really intend to change 
their  behavior.  It  became  a  public  relations  term,  an 
38.
attempt to be seen as abreast with the latest thinking of 
Rather, happiness is often found in those moments we are  what we must do to save our planet from widespread harm. 
most vulnerable, alone or in pain.  But then, in a decade or so, some governments, industries, 
educational institutions, and organizations started to use 
We seek out feel-good experiences, always on the lookout for  the term in a serious manner. In the United States a number 
the next holiday, purchase or culinary experience. This approach  of  large  corporations  appointed  a  vice  president  for 
sustainability. Not only were these officials interested in 
to happiness is relatively recent; it depends on our capacity both 
how their companies could profit by producing “green” 
to pad our lives with material pleasures and to feel that we can 
products, but they were often given the task of making the 
control our suffering. ( ) Painkillers, as we know them today, 
① company more efficient by reducing wastes and pollution 
are a relatively recent invention and access to material comfort is 
and by reducing its carbon emissions. 
now within reach of a much larger proportion of the world’s 
population. ( ) These technological and economic advances  *buz??zword: 유행어    **abreast: 나란히
②
have had significant cultural implications, leading us to see our 
negative experiences as a problem and maximizing our positive  While the term “sustainability,” in the initial phase, was 
experiences as the answer. ( ) Yet, through this we have  popular among those who  (A)  to be eco-conscious, 
③
forgotten that being happy in life is not just about pleasure. ( )  it later came to be used by those who would  (B)  
④
Comfort, contentment and satisfaction have never been the elixir  their pro-environmental thoughts.
of happiness. ( ) Happiness is there, on the edges of these 
⑤
(A) (B) (A) (B)
experiences, and when we get a glimpse of that kind of happiness 
pretended actualize pretended disregard
it is powerful, transcendent and compelling. ① …… ② ……
refused realize refused idealize
③ …… ④ ……
*culinary: 요리의  **elixir: 특효약  ***transcendent: 뛰어난  ⑤ attempted ……mask
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
When  they  finished  practicing,  Joe  noticed  his  father 
Aristotle did not think that all human beings should be 
standing in the corner. “Wow, that was quite wonderful,” he 
allowed to engage in political activity: in his system, women, 
said with admiration. Master Brooks came toward his son. “I 
slaves, and foreigners were explicitly (a)excluded from the 
love the way you created those unique sounds while keeping 
right to rule themselves and others. Nevertheless, his basic 
idea that politics is a unique collective activity that is directed  the  spirit  of  the  violin.  I  underestimated  the  power  that 
at certain (b)common goals and ends still resonates today.  crossover music can create,” said Master Brooks to (b)him. 
But which ends? Many thinkers and political figures since  Joe and his father returned home, both humming the melody 
the ancient world have developed different ideas about the  that the band had been practicing.
goals that politics can or should achieve. This approach is 
known as political moralism. (C)
For moralists, political life is a branch of ethics or moral 
― “Well, did you get permission?” asked Brian as soon as Joe 
philosophy so  it  is  (c)unsurprising  that  there  are  many 
― entered the practice room the following day. “Um, I’m not 
philosophers  in  the  group  of  moralistic  political  thinkers. 
sure,” answered Joe without confidence. “(c)You can tell us 
Political moralists argue that politics should be directed toward 
about it after practice,” Brian said as he placed his fingers on 
achieving  substantial  goals,  or  that  political  arrangements 
the keyboard. Beside him, Nick was tuning his guitar. Joe 
should be organized to (d)protect certain things. Among these 
things are political values such as justice, equality, liberty,  thought that he would play just one last time before telling 
happiness,  fraternity,  or  national  self-determination.  At  its  them that (d)he might pull out of the concert. The trio swung 
most radical, moralism produces descriptions of ideal political  into their routine, as easily as only a group that had practiced 
societies known as Utopias, named after English statesman  long and hard together could.
and philosopher Thomas More’s book Utopia, published in 
1516,  which  imagined  an  ideal  nation.  Utopian  political  (D)
thinking dates back to the ancient Greek philosopher Plato’s 
After  the  class,  Joe  was  alone  with  his  father.  He  had 
book the Republic, but it is still used by modern thinkers such 
something important to talk about. Joe took a deep breath and 
as Robert Nozick to explore ideas. Some theorists consider 
said, “I have been asked to play in a concert, and I would like 
Utopian political thinking to be a (e)promising undertaking, 
your permission first. It is a crossover concert.” Master 
since it has led in the past to justifications of totalitarian 
Brooks  looked  surprised.  Indeed,  the  master’s  dislike  of 
violence. However, at its best, Utopian thinking is part of a 
crossover music was no secret. “Father,” Joe took a deep 
process of striving toward a better society, and many thinkers 
use it to suggest values to be pursued or protected. breath and continued, “I respect your views, but it is not what 
(e)you think. Why don’t you come and listen to our practice 
*resonate: 공명하다,  울리다  **fraternity: 동포애,  우애
tomorrow? If you don’t like it, I will cancel.”
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A)
A Road to Becoming a Great Political Philosopher 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
①
Toward Genuine Liberty, Beyond Fear and Violence 가장 적절한 것은?
②
③ Moralistic Approach in Politics: In Pursuit of Ideal Values (B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
① － － ② － －
How to Identify the Historical Root of Political Moralists
④ (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③ － － ④ － －
Why Philosophers Tend to Be Moralists: The Fate of Philosophy
⑤ (D) (C) (B)
⑤ － －
(a) (e)
42. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은  44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e)  중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?  [3점]
것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤  (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
(A)
Joe
① 는 바이올린에 천부적인 재능이 있었다. 
When Master Brooks played a Mozart piece on the violin 
Master Brooks Joe
② 는  가 속한 밴드의  연습을 보러 갔다.
for his class to learn, the room was filled with waves of 
Master Brooks
③ 는 크로스오버 음악에 대한 자신의 견해를 바꾸었다.
beautiful, soul-stirring sound. The class tried to emulate the 
Joe
music played by this renowned guest musician. Among the  ④ 가 속한 밴드는 두 명의 연주자로 구성되었다.
Joe
students in the class, Joe Brooks was by far the best. In fact,  ⑤ 는 수업이 끝난 후에 아버지와 단둘이 대화를 나눴다.
Joe was the master’s son. His father had placed a baby violin 
in his hands at the age of four, and Joe was a natural talent. 
Now, just twelve years later, he was already on (a)his way to  *  확인 사항
becoming a virtuoso like his father.
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
*emulate: 열심히 배우다  **virtuoso: 거장 하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2021학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 송별회 장소를 변경한 이유를 고르시오.
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
① 참석 인원에 변경 사항이 생겨서
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
② 예약한 레스토랑의 평이 안 좋아서
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
③ 모임 장소로 가는 교통편이 불편해서
④ 송별회 주인공이 다른 메뉴를 원해서
1. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
⑤ 해산물 알레르기가 있는 동료들이 있어서
고르시오.
Run with Your Dog
① 등교 시간 변경을 알리려고 8. 대화를 듣고,    행사에 관해 언급되지 않은 
② 학교 매점의 영업 재개를 안내하려고 것을 고르시오.
③ 체육관 신축 공사 일정을 예고하려고
① 목적 ② 날짜 ③ 복장
④ 교실 의자와 책상 교체 계획을 공지하려고
④ 장소 ⑤ 참가비
⑤ 학교 급식 만족도 조사 참여를 독려하려고
Bluemont Salt Mine
9. 의 특별 행사에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 
2. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
① 등산 전에는 과식을 삼가는 것이 좋다. 10 10 10 16
① 월  일부터  월  일까지 진행된다.
② 야생동물에게 먹이를 주지 말아야 한다.
② 가장 깊은 구역에 입장이 허용된다.
③ 야외 활동은 가족 간의 유대를 돈독히 한다.
③ 사진 촬영이 가능하다.
④ 산에서 야생동물을 만났을 때는 침착해야 된다.
④ 입장료는 무료이다.
⑤ 반려동물을 키우는 것은 정서 안정에 도움이 된다.
⑤ 방문객들에게 선물을 준다.
3. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 주문할 크레용 
① 스타일리스트－기상 캐스터 ② 연출가－극작가 세트를 고르시오.
③ 매니저－뮤지컬 배우 ④ 해군 장교－항해사 Crayon Sets
⑤ 디자이너－신문 기자
Number of 
Set Price Washable Free Gift
Crayons
?
4. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을  A 24 $9 coloring book
①
고르시오. B 24 $11 sharpener
② ??
C 36 $15 sharpener
③
D 36 $17 coloring book
④ ?
E 48 $21 coloring book
⑤ ?
11. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
I think so. I should be fine by then.
①
I’m sorry. I forgot to bring my racket.
②
Of course. Keep me posted on his recovery.
③
I’m afraid not. The doctor’s schedule is full today.
④
Good idea. Let’s watch the tennis match at my house.
⑤
5. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
12. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
① 프로젝터와 스크린 챙기기 ② 담요 가져오기 적절한 것을 고르시오.
③ 영화 선택하기 ④ 접이식 의자 구매하기 I remember where I left my uniform.
①
⑤ 짐을 차에 싣기 We can’t participate in P.E. class now.
②
You should hurry before the cafeteria closes.
③
6. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. [3점] You can leave it with me and I’ll find the owner.
④
$126 $130 $140 $144 $150 I hope someone will bring it with your belongings.
① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑤
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Dear Mr. Anderson:
Woman:
My name is Sophia Willis, Events Manager of the 2020 
I’ll give it a try. What time shall we meet?
① Caroline County Art Contest. I am currently looking for a place 
② Not yet. We need to wait for the food to be ready. for this year’s contest exhibition. The Caroline County Art 
I don’t know. Do you want me to send the recipe? Contest has had over one hundred artworks submitted to us by 
③
local artists. For the theme, we wanted artists to explore the 
Absolutely. I’ll stress the importance of education.
④
natural world of Caroline County. I believe the Garden Cafe 
Cheer up. We can relax after our homework is done.
⑤ Gallery would be a perfect place to host the event, as your 
gallery is well-known for its beautiful garden. The exhibition 
is usually held throughout October, and we very much hope 
that we can rent a space for the exhibition at the Garden Cafe 
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  Gallery during this time. I look forward to your response. 
Yours sincerely,
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sophia Willis
Man:       
Not now. It’ll be easier to park there late at night. ① 출품 작품 전시회에 초대하려고
①
② 작품 제출 방법의 변경을 안내하려고
Sounds good. I’m glad to hear that you’ll arrive soon.
②
③ 출품 작품 전시 장소 대여를 문의하려고
Sure. I’ll check the app for a spot and make a reservation.
③ ④ 정원 박람회의 변경된 일정을 공지하려고
One moment. The kids should be back from the museum.
④ ⑤ 지역 예술가들에게 작품 제출을 독려하려고
No problem. I’ll remove the app for the children’s safety.
⑤
Annette
19. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
The day of the Five Mile Fun Walk had arrived. Annette had 
been waiting for Reiner at the registration point for over an hour. 
Jane Andrew There  was  still  no  sign  of  him.  She  started  thinking  that 
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이  에게 할 말로 가장 
something bad might have happened to him. Getting concerned, 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
she  tried  calling  Reiner’s  phone  again,  but  there  was  no 
Jane:        response. At that moment, she heard a voice calling her name. 
She found Reiner coming toward her. “Thank goodness! What 
Make sure everybody is prepared for next week.
① happened?” she asked. He explained that the traffic had been 
I think you should wear this jacket for the festival.
② terrible. What was worse, he had left his phone at home. “I’m so 
Thank you for keeping all your things in perfect shape. sorry,” he said. She started to relax. “I’m fine now. As long as 
③
How about choosing just the items that are in a good state? you’re here and safe. Why don’t we go and register?” They 
④
headed into the event together.
Why don’t you buy secondhand items instead of new ones?
⑤
worried relieved confident nervous
① → ② →
calm upset regretful grateful
③ → ④ →
bored amazed
⑤ →
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Given the right conditions, entrepreneurship can be fully 
positive effects of plants on insects woven into the fabric of campus life, greatly expanding its 
①
educational reach. One study showed that, within the workplace, 
benefits of insects to human beings
②
peers influence each other to spot opportunities and act on 
various methods of insect reproduction
③ them: the more entrepreneurs you have working together in an 
④ relationship between diseases and insects office, the more likely their colleagues will catch the bug. A 
ways to prevent insects from damaging crops study of Stanford University alumni found that those “who 
⑤
have varied work and educational backgrounds are much more 
likely  to  start  their  own  businesses  than  those  who  have 
focused on one role at work or concentrated in one subject at 
school.” To cultivate an entrepreneurial culture, colleges and 
17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌  것은?
universities need to offer students a broad choice of experiences 
honeybees grasshoppers silkworms and  wide  exposure  to  different  ideas.  They  are  uniquely 
① ② ③
positioned to do this by combining the resources of academic 
fruit flies ladybugs
④ ⑤
programming,  residential  life,  student  groups,  and  alumni 
networks. 
*entrepreneur: 기업가  **alumni: 졸업생
① 훌륭한 기업가가 되기 위해서 관심 있는 한 분야에 집중해야 한다.
② 대학은 학생들이 기업가 정신을 함양하도록 환경을 조성해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에  ③ 좋은 직장을 얻기 위해서 학업과 대외 활동에 충실해야 한다. 
④ 기업은 대학생들의 다양한 소모임 활동을 적극 지원해야 한다. 
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 대학생은 학업 성취를 위하여 경험과 생각의 폭을 넓혀야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
don’t knock the box
21. 밑줄 친  가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로  23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
가장 적절한 것은? Conventional wisdom in the West, influenced by philosophers 
By expecting what’s likely to happen next, you prepare for  from  Plato  to  Descartes,  credits  individuals  and  especially 
the few most likely scenarios so that you don’t have to figure  geniuses with creativity and originality. Social and cultural 
things out while they’re happening. It’s therefore not a surprise  influences and causes are minimized, ignored, or eliminated 
when a restaurant server offers you a menu. When she brings  from consideration at all. Thoughts, original and conventional, 
you a glass with a clear fluid in it, you don’t have to ask if it’s  are  identified  with  individuals,  and  the  special  things  that 
water. After you eat, you don’t have to figure out why you 
individuals are and do are traced to their genes and their brains. 
aren’t hungry anymore. All these things are expected and are 
The “trick” here is to recognize that individual humans are social 
therefore not problems to solve. Furthermore, imagine how 
constructions themselves, embodying and reflecting the variety 
demanding it would be to always consider all the possible uses 
of social and cultural influences they have been exposed to 
for all the familiar objects with which you interact. Should I 
during their lives. Our individuality is not denied, but it is viewed 
use my hammer or my telephone to pound in that nail? On a 
as a product of specific social and cultural experiences. The brain 
daily basis, functional fixedness is a relief, not a curse. That’s 
itself is a social thing, influenced structurally and at the level 
why you shouldn’t even attempt to consider all your options 
of its connectivities by social environments. The “individual” 
and possibilities. You can’t. If you tried to, then you’d never 
is a legal, religious, and political fiction just as the “I” is a 
get anything done. So don’t knock the box. Ironically, although 
grammatical illusion. 
it limits your thinking, it also makes you smart. It helps you to 
recognition of the social nature inherent in individuality
stay one step ahead of reality. ①
ways of filling the gap between individuality and collectivity
②
Deal with a matter based on your habitual expectations.
① issues with separating original thoughts from conventional ones
③
Question what you expect from a familiar object.
② acknowledgment of the true individuality embodied in human genes
④
Replace predetermined routines with fresh ones.
③ necessity of shifting from individualism to interdependence
⑤
Think over all possible outcomes of a given situation.
④
Extend all the boundaries that guide your thinking to insight.
⑤
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Music is a human art form, an inseparable part of the human 
experience everywhere in the world. Music is social, and tightly 
woven into the tapestry of life, and young children are very much 
a part of this multifaceted fabric. The musical experiences they 
have  provide  opportunities  for  them  to  know  language,  24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
behaviors, customs, traditions, beliefs, values, stories, and other  The discovery that man’s knowledge is not, and never has 
cultural nuances. As they become musically skilled through  been, perfectly accurate has had a humbling and perhaps a 
experiences in song and instrumental music, young children can 
calming effect upon the soul of modern man. The nineteenth 
also  grow  cultural  knowledge  and  sensitivity.  Music  is  an 
century, as we have observed, was the last to believe that the 
extremely important aspect of culture, shaping and transmitting 
world,  as  a  whole  as  well  as  in  its  parts,  could  ever  be 
the above-mentioned aspects that characterize groups of people. 
perfectly known. We realize now that this is, and always was, 
Exposing young children to the world’s musical cultures brings 
impossible. We know within limits, not absolutely, even if the 
them into the cultural conversation, allowing them to learn about 
limits can usually be adjusted to satisfy our needs. Curiously, 
self and others in an artistically meaningful and engaging way. 
from this new level of uncertainty even greater goals emerge 
Prior to the development of social biases and cultural preferences 
and appear to be attainable. Even if we cannot know the world 
that all too easily turn into prejudices, the opportunity to know 
with  absolute  precision,  we  can  still  control  it.  Even  our 
people through song, dance, and instrument play is a gift to all 
inherently incomplete knowledge seems to work as powerfully 
who work for the well-balanced development of young children 
as ever. In short, we may never know precisely how high is the 
into the responsible citizens they will one day become.
highest mountain, but we continue to be certain that we can 
*tapestry: 색색의 실로 수놓은 장식 걸개  **multifaceted: 다면의 get to the top nevertheless.
Summits Yet to Be Reached: An Onward Journey to Knowledge
① 아이들의 균형 잡힌 성장을 위해서는 다양한 경험이 중요하다. ①
Over the Mountain: A Single But Giant Step to Success
② 사회적 편견과 문화적 선호도는 서로 밀접하게 관련되어 있다. ②
Integrating Parts into a Whole: The Road to Perfection
③ 어린 나이에 다양한 음악에 노출되면 예술적 감각이 향상된다. ③
How to Live Together in an Age of Uncertainty
④ 음악을 포함한 예술은 특정 문화에 대한 당대의 사회적 시각을 반영한다.  ④
The Two Faces of a Knowledge-Based Society
⑤ 음악은 아이들을 사회?문화적으로 균형 잡힌 시민으로 성장하게 해 준다. ⑤
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
Springfield Science Invention Contest
25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 
Top 7 Asia-Pacific Destinations (2018) 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
International Average
Overnight Spend  Springfield Science Invention Contest
Rank Destination
Arrivals per Day
Springfield High School invites all students to participate 
(million) (USD)
in the Springfield Science Invention Contest. In this annual 
1 Bangkok 22.8 $184
contest, you have the opportunity to invent a useful object and 
2 Singapore 14.7 $272
show your creativity!
3 Kuala Lumpur 13.8 $142
4 Tokyo 12.9 $196 Details
5 Seoul 11.3 $155 Judging criteria are creativity and usefulness of the invention.
?
6 Osaka 10.1 $223
Participants must enter in teams of four and can only join 
?
7 Phuket 9.9 $247
one team.
The table above shows the top seven destination cities in the  Submission is limited to one invention per team.
?
Asia-Pacific region in 2018 by international overnight arrivals,  Prizes
with additional information on the average spend per day in those  1st Place $50 gift certificate
? ―
cities. Bangkok was the top destination in the Asia-Pacific  2nd Place $30 gift certificate
① ? ―
region  with  22.8  million  international  overnight  arrivals,  3rd Place $10 gift certificate
? ―
immediately  followed  by  Singapore  with  14.7  million 
Note
international overnight arrivals. Kuala Lumpur was ranked in 
② Inventions must be submitted to the science lab by October1, 2020.
?
third place based on the number of international overnight 
For more information, visit www.hsspringfield.edu.
arrivals, and the average spend per day in this city was more than 
$150. Tokyo was ranked in fourth place for the number of 
③ ① 매년 개최되는 대회이다.
international overnight arrivals, and the average spend per day in 
② 심사 기준은 발명품의 창의성과 유용성이다.
this city was $196. The number of international overnight 
④ ③ 발명품은 한 팀당 두 개까지 제출할 수 있다.
arrivals in Seoul was larger than that of Osaka. Phuket was the  1 50
⑤ ④ 등은  달러 상품권을 받는다.
only city where the number of international overnight arrivals was 
⑤ 발명품은 과학 실험실로 제출해야 한다.
less than 10 million, and the average spend per day in this city was 
$247.
Poetry Writing Basics Workshop
28. 에  관한  다음  안내문의 
26. Marc Isambard Brunel에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지  내용과 일치하는 것은?
않는  것은?
Poetry Writing Basics Workshop
Marc Isambard Brunel (1769 1849) is best known for the 
? Join our Poetry Writing Basics Workshop and meet the 
design  and  construction  of  the  Thames  Tunnel.  Originally  poet, Ms. Grace Larson!
born in France, Brunel escaped to the United States during the 
All students of George Clarkson University are invited.
French  Revolution.  He  later  moved  to  London.  When  the 
When: Thursday, September 24, 2020(1:00 p.m. 4:00 p.m.)
?
Napoleonic Wars were at their height, he invented machines 
Where: Main Seminar Room, 1st Floor, Student Union
for  making  boots.  During  the  Napoleonic  Wars,  Brunel’s 
factory  supplied  British  troops  with  boots.  After  the  Wars  After an introduction to the basic techniques of poetry writing, 
you will: 
ended, however, the government stopped buying his boots and 
1. Write your own poem.
he  went  out  of  business.  A  few  years  later,  Brunel  was 
2. Read it aloud to the other participants.
imprisoned for several months because of his debt. At that 
3. Receive expert feedback from Ms. Larson.
time, London was very much divided by the River Thames 
Registration Fee: $10
and needed more ways for people and goods to move across it. 
Register on or before September 18 and pay only $7.
In 1825, Brunel designed a tunnel under the river. The Thames  ※
Any  related  inquiries  should  be  sent  via  email  to 
Tunnel  officially  opened  on  25  March  1843,  and  Brunel, 
studentun@georgeclarkson.edu.
despite being in ill health, attended the opening ceremony.
① 프랑스 혁명 중에 미국으로 달아났다. ① 목요일 오전에 진행된다.
3
② 부츠를 만드는 기계를 발명하였다. ② 학생회관  층에서 열린다.
③ 그의 공장은 영국 군대에 부츠를 공급한 적이 있다. ③ 참가자는 자신이 창작한 시를 낭독할 것이다.
9 18 10
④ 빚 때문에 감옥에 수감되었다. ④ 월  일까지는 등록비가  달러이다.
Thames Tunnel
⑤   개통식에 아파서 참석하지 못했다. ⑤ 관련 문의는 이메일로 할 수 없다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은? [3점] [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Competitive activities can be more than just performance  31. “What’s in a name? That which we call a rose, by any other 
showcases which the best is recognized and the rest are 
① name would smell as sweet.” This thought of Shakespeare’s 
overlooked. The provision of timely, constructive feedback to 
points  up  a  difference  between  roses  and,  say,  paintings. 
participants on performance is an asset that some competitions 
② Natural objects, such as roses, are not . They are 
and contests offer. In a sense, all competitions give feedback. 
not taken as vehicles of meanings and messages. They belong 
For many, this is restricted to information about whether the 
to no tradition, strictly speaking have no style, and are not 
participant is an award-or prizewinner. The provision of that 
understood  within  a  framework  of  culture  and  convention. 
type of feedback can be interpreted as shifting the emphasis to 
Rather, they are sensed and savored relatively directly, without 
demonstrating  superior  performance  but  not necessarily 
③ intellectual  mediation,  and  so  what  they  are  called,  either 
excellence. The best competitions promote excellence, not just 
individually or collectively, has little bearing on our experience 
winning or “beating” others. The emphasis on superiority is 
of them. What a work of art is titled, on the other hand, has a 
what we typically see as fostering a detrimental effect of 
④ significant effect on the aesthetic face it presents and on the 
competition. Performance feedback requires that the program 
qualities we correctly perceive in it. A painting of a rose, by a 
go  beyond  the  “win,  place,  or  show”  level  of  feedback. 
name other than the one it has, might very well smell different, 
Information about performance can be very helpful, not only 
aesthetically speaking. The painting titled Rose of Summer and 
to the participant who does not win or place but also to those 
an  indiscernible  painting  titled  Vermillion  Womanhood  are 
who do.
⑤ physically,  but  also  semantically  and  aesthetically,  distinct 
*foster: 조장하다  **detrimental: 유해한 objects of art.
*savor: 음미하다  **indiscernible: 식별하기 어려운
***semantically: 의미적으로
changed classified preserved
① ② ③
controlled interpreted
④ ⑤
32. Genetic engineering followed by cloning to distribute many 
identical animals or plants is sometimes seen as a threat to the 
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
diversity  of  nature.  However,  humans  have  been  replacing 
않은  것은?
diverse natural habitats with artificial monoculture for millennia. 
If I say to you, ‘Don’t think of a white bear’, you will find it 
Most natural habitats in the advanced nations have already been 
difficult not to think of a white bear. In this way, ‘thought 
replaced with some form of artificial environment based on mass 
suppression can actually increase the thoughts one wishes to 
production or repetition. The real threat to biodiversity is surely 
suppress instead of calming them’. One common example of 
the need to convert ever more of our planet into production 
this is that people on a diet who try not to think about food 
zones to feed the ever-increasing human population. The cloning 
often begin to think much more about food. This process is 
①
and  transgenic  alteration  of  domestic  animals  makes  little 
therefore  also  known  as  the  rebound  effect.  The ironic 
②
difference to the overall situation. Conversely, the renewed 
effect  seems  to  be  caused  by  the  interplay  of  two  related 
interest in genetics has led to a growing awareness that there 
cognitive processes. This dual-process system involves, first, 
are many wild plants and animals with interesting or useful 
an intentional operating process, which consciously attempts to 
genetic  properties  that  could  be  used  for  a  variety  of 
locate thoughts unrelated to the suppressed ones. Second, 
③
as-yet-unknown purposes. This has led in turn to a realization 
and simultaneously, an unconscious monitoring process tests 
that          
whether the operating system is functioning effectively. If the 
because they may harbor tomorrow’s drugs against cancer, 
monitoring system encounters thoughts inconsistent with the 
malaria, or obesity.
intended ones, it prompts the intentional operating process to 
ensure that these are replaced by ④inappropriate thoughts.  *monoculture: 단일 경작
However, it is argued, the intentional operating system can fail  ecological systems are genetically programmed
①
due to increased cognitive load caused by fatigue, stress and  we should avoid destroying natural ecosystems
②
emotional factors, and so the monitoring process filters the  we need to stop creating genetically modified organisms
③
inappropriate  thoughts  into  consciousness,  making  them  artificial organisms can survive in natural environments
④
highly ⑤accessible. ⑤ living things adapt themselves to their physical environments
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. Since human beings are at once both similar and different, they  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
should be treated equally because of both. Such a view, which 
In  a  highly  commercialized  setting  such  as  the  United 
grounds equality not in human uniformity but in the interplay of 
States, it is not surprising that many landscapes are seen as 
uniformity and difference, builds difference into the very concept 
commodities. In other words, they are valued because of their 
of equality, breaks the traditional equation of equality with 
market potential. Residents develop an identity in part based 
similarity, and is immune to monist distortion. Once the basis of 
on how the landscape can generate income for the community.
equality changes so does its content. Equality involves equal 
This  process  involves  more  than  the  conversion  of  the 
①
freedom or opportunity to be different, and treating human beings 
natural  elements  into  commodities. The  landscape  itself, 
②
equally requires us to take into account both their similarities and 
including the people and their sense of self, takes on the form 
differences. When the latter are not relevant, equality entails 
of a commodity. Landscape protection in the US traditionally 
③
uniform  or  identical  treatment;  when  they  are,  it  requires 
focuses  on  protecting  areas  of  wilderness,  typically  in 
differential treatment. Equal rights do not mean identical rights, 
mountainous regions. Over time, the landscape identity can 
④
for individuals with different cultural backgrounds and needs 
evolve into a sort of “logo” that can be used to sell the stories 
might
of  the  landscape. Thus,  California’s  “Wine  Country,” 
⑤
in respect of whatever happens to be the content of their rights. 
Florida’s “Sun Coast,” or South Dakota’s “Badlands” shape 
Equality involves not just rejection of irrelevant differences as is 
how both outsiders and residents perceive a place, and these 
commonly argued, but also full recognition of legitimate and 
labels build a set of expectations associated with the culture of 
relevant ones.
[3점] those who live there.
*monist: 일원론의  **entail: 내포하다
require different rights to enjoy equality
①
abandon their own freedom for equality
②
welcome the identical perception of inequality
③
accept their place in the social structure more easily
④
reject relevant differences to gain full understanding
⑤
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
34. Protopia is a state of becoming, rather than a destination. It  In  the  fifth  century  B.C.E.,  the  Greek  philosopher 
Protagoras pronounced, “Man is the measure of all things.” 
is a process. In the protopian mode, things are better today 
In other words, we feel entitled to ask the world, “What 
than they were yesterday, although only a little better. It is 
good are you?”
incremental  improvement  or  mild  progress.  The  “pro”  in 
protopian stems from the notions of process and progress. This 
(A) Abilities  said  to  “make  us  human” empathy, 
―
subtle progress is not dramatic, not exciting. It is easy to miss 
communication, grief, toolmaking, and so on all exist to 
―
because a protopia generates almost as many new problems as 
varying degrees among other minds sharing the world with 
new  benefits.  The  problems  of  today  were  caused  by 
us. Animals with backbones (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, 
yesterday’s  technological  successes,  and  the  technological 
birds, and mammals) all share the same basic skeleton, 
solutions  to  today’s  problems  will  cause  the  problems  of 
organs, nervous systems, hormones, and behaviors.
tomorrow.  This  circular  expansion  of  both  problems  and 
(B) We assume that we are the world’s standard, that all things 
solutions . 
should be compared to us. Such an assumption makes us 
Ever since the Enlightenment and the invention of science, 
overlook a lot.
we’ve managed to create a tiny bit more than we’ve destroyed 
each  year.  But  that  few  percent  positive  difference  is  (C) Just  as  different  models  of  automobiles  each  have  an 
compounded over decades into what we might call civilization.  engine,  drive  train,  four  wheels,  doors,  and  seats,  we 
Its benefits never star in movies. differ mainly in terms of our outside contours and a few 
[3점]
internal tweaks. But like naive car buyers, most people 
*incremental: 증가의  **compound: 조합하다
see only animals’ varied exteriors.
conceals the limits of innovations at the present time
①
makes it difficult to predict the future with confidence *contour: 윤곽,  외형  **tweak: 조정,  개조
②
motivates us to quickly achieve a protopian civilization  (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ ① － － ② － －
hides a steady accumulation of small net benefits over time (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ ③ － － ④ － －
produces a considerable change in technological successes (C) (B) (A)
⑤ ⑤ － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.
It can be difficult to decide the place of fine art, such as  Rather, it evolved naturally as certain devices were found 
oil paintings, watercolours, sketches or sculptures, in an  in practice to be both workable and useful. 
archival institution. 
Film  has  no  grammar. ( ) There  are,  however,  some 
①
(A) The  best  archival  decisions  about  art  do  not  focus  on  vaguely defined rules of usage in cinematic language, and the 
territoriality (this object belongs in my institution even  syntax  of  film its  systematic  arrangement orders  these 
― ―
though I do not have the resources to care for it) or on  rules and indicates relationships among them. ( ) As with 
②
questions of monetary value or prestige (this object raises  written and spoken languages, it is important to remember 
the cultural standing of my institution). The best decisions  that  the  syntax  of  film  is  a  result  of  its  usage,  not  a 
focus on what evidential value exists and what is best for  determinant of it. ( ) There is nothing preordained about 
③
the item. film  syntax. ( ) Like  the  syntax  of  written  and  spoken 
④
(B) But art can also carry aesthetic value, which elevates the  language,  the  syntax  of  film  is  an  organic  development, 
job of evaluation into another realm. Aesthetic value and  descriptive  rather  than  prescriptive,  and  it  has  changed 
the notion of artistic beauty are important considerations,  considerably  over  the  years. ( ) “Hollywood  Grammar” 
⑤
but they are not what motivates archival preservation in  may sound laughable now, but during the thirties, forties, and 
the first instance. early fifties it was an accurate model of the way Hollywood 
(C) Art can serve as documentary evidence, especially when  films were constructed.
[3점]
the  items  were  produced  before  photography  became  *preordained: 미리 정해진
common. Sketches of soldiers on a battlefield, paintings of 
English country villages or portraits of Dutch townspeople  (A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  , 
can provide the only visual evidence of a long-ago place, 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
person or time.
[3점]
Research from the Harwood Institute for Public Innovation 
*archival: 기록(보관소)의  **prestige: 명성,  위신
in  the  USA  shows  that  people  feel  that  ‘materialism’ 
***realm: 영역
somehow comes between them and the satisfaction of their 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
① － － ② － － social needs. A report entitled Yearning for Balance, based 
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③ － － ④ － － on a nationwide survey of Americans, concluded that they 
(C) (B) (A)
⑤ － － were ‘deeply ambivalent about wealth and material gain’. A 
large majority of people wanted society to ‘move away 
from greed and excess toward a way of life more centred on 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장  values,  community,  and  family’.  But  they  also  felt  that 
적절한 곳을 고르시오. these priorities were not shared by most of their fellow 
Americans, who, they believed, had become ‘increasingly 
38.
atomized, selfish, and irresponsible’. As a result they often 
As long as you do not run out of copies before completing  felt isolated. However, the report says, that when brought 
this  process,  you  will  know  that  you  have  a  sufficient  together in focus groups to discuss these issues, people 
number to go around.   were ‘surprised and excited to find that others share[d] their 
views’. Rather than uniting us with others in a common 
We  sometimes  solve  number  problems  almost  without 
cause, the unease we feel about the loss of social values and 
realizing it. ( ) For example, suppose you are conducting 
①
the way we are drawn into the pursuit of material gain is 
a meeting and you want to ensure that everyone there has a 
often experienced as if it were a purely private ambivalence 
copy of the agenda. ( ) You can deal with this by labelling 
②
which cuts us off from others.
each copy of the handout in turn with the initials of each of 
those  present. ( ) You  have  then  solved  this  problem  *ambivalent: 양면 가치의
③ ??
without resorting to arithmetic and without explicit counting. 
( ④ ) There are numbers at work for us here all the same and  Many Americans, believing that materialism keeps them 
they allow precise comparison of one collection with another,  from (A) social  values,  feel  detached  from  most 
even though the members that make up the collections could  others, but this is actually a fairly (B) concern.
have entirely different characters, as is the case here, where 
one set is a collection of people, while the other consists of  (A) (B) (A) (B)
pieces of paper. ( ) What numbers allow us to do is to  pursuing unnecessary pursuing common
⑤ ① …… ② ……
compare the relative size of one set with another. holding personal denying ethical
③ …… ④ ……
denying primary
*arithmetic: 산수 ⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Sally just wanted to get her present and leave the field 
To the extent that sufficient context has been provided, the 
because she was starting to get hot and feel irritated. (b)She 
reader can come to a well-crafted text with no expert knowledge 
had only filled her sack twice, but the others were now taking 
and come away with a good approximation of what has been 
their third sacks to the granary. Sally sighed heavily. Then an 
intended by the author. The text has become a public document 
idea struck her. To make the sack lighter and speed things up, 
and the reader can read it with a (a)minimum of effort and 
she quickly filled her last sack with corn stalks. Sally reached 
struggle;  his  experience  comes  close  to  what  Freud  has 
the granary first, and her grandmother asked (c)her to put 
described as the deployment of “evenly-hovering attention.” 
aside the final load and write her name on it.
He puts himself in the author’s hands (some have had this 
*granary: 곡물창고  **stalk: 줄기
experience with great novelists such as Dickens or Tolstoy) and 
(C)
he (b)follows where the author leads. The real world has 
vanished and the fictive world has taken its place. Now consider  They reached the field and started to work happily. Soon 
the other extreme. When we come to a badly crafted text in  after, Sally joined them with her sack. Around mid-morning, 
their grandmother came with ice-cold lemonade and peach 
which context and content are not happily joined, we must 
pie. After finishing, the children continued working until the 
struggle  to  understand,  and  our  sense  of  what  the  author 
sun was high and their sacks were bursting. Each child had to 
intended  probably  bears (c)close  correspondence  to  his 
make three trips to the granary. Grandmother was impressed 
original intention. An out-of-date translation will give us this 
by  their  efforts  and (d)she  wanted  to  give  them  presents 
experience; as we read, we must bring the language up to date, 
accordingly.
and understanding comes only at the price of a fairly intense 
struggle with the text. Badly presented content with no frame of 
(D)
reference can provide (d)the same experience; we see the 
Grandmother asked the other children to do the same thing. 
words but have no sense of how they are to be taken. The author 
Then, all of the children enjoyed their grandmother’s delicious 
who fails to provide the context has (e)mistakenly assumed 
lunch. “I am so pleased with your work,” she told them after 
that his picture of the world is shared by all his readers and fails 
lunch. “This year, you can all take home your final load as a 
to realize that supplying the right frame of reference is a critical 
present!” The children cheered for joy, gladly thanked her, and 
part of the task of writing. lifted their sacks to take home. Sally was terribly disappointed. 
*deployment: (전략적)  배치 There was nothing but useless corn stalks in (e)her sack. She 
**evenly-hovering attention: 고르게 주의를 기울이는 것 then  made  the  long  walk  home,  pretending  that  she  was 
carrying a heavy load.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Building a Wall Between Reality and the Fictive World
①
가장 적절한 것은?
Creative Reading: Going Beyond the Writer’s Intentions
②
③ Usefulness of Readers’ Experiences for Effective Writing ① (B) －(D) － (C) ② (C) － (B) － (D)
Context in Writing: A Lighthouse for Understanding Texts (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
④ ③ － － ④ － －
Trapped in Their Own Words: The Narrow Outlook of Authors (D) (C) (B)
⑤ ⑤ － －
(a) (e)
42. 밑줄  친  (a)～(e)  중에서  문맥상  쓰임이  적절하지  않은  44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
것은? [3점]
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)  ①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
① 아이들은 할머니의 옥수수 수확을 돕기 위해 모였다.
(A)
Sally
② 는 덥고 짜증나서 옥수수 밭을 떠나고 싶었다.
The  children  arrived  at  sunrise  at  their  grandmother’s 
③ 아이들은 각자 세 번씩 옥수수가 담긴 자루를 곡물창고로 날라야 했다.
house. They always gathered at this time of year to assist 
④ 할머니는 아이들에게 맛있는 점심을 제공했다.
with her corn harvest. In return, their grandmother would  Sally
⑤ 는 옥수수가 담긴 무거운 자루를 가지고 집으로 갔다.
reward them with a present and by cooking a delicious feast. 
The  children  were  all  in  great  spirits.  But  not  Sally.  She 
disliked working in the corn field as she hated the heat and  *  확인 사항
the dust. (a)She sat silently as the others took a sack each 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
and then sang their way to the field.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.cinema observatory amusement park
stationery store camera shop
nervous satisfied disappointed
pleased envious
$30 $35 $40 $45 $50
manuscript:
 Mike
Mike: _______________________________
Sorry, but we only have three days to prepare.
No problem. It’s easy to copy the computer file.
I’m happy to hear the presentation date is changed.
Sounds good, but it’s too late for a last minute change.
Fine. I’ll change the presentation as you suggested.
This[this]
This  is  a  piece  of  electronic  equipment  that  uses 
invisible  waves  instead  of  wires.  In  order  to  operate  it, 
you  need  either  electricity  or  a  battery.  It  usually  has  an 
antenna  that  helps  with  the  reception  of  the  signal.  This 
also  has  a  volume  controller  and  a  tuner  that  you  adjust 
to  receive  programs  from  different  stations.  In  most  cases, 
this  functions  well  without  being  limited  to  specific  times 
Woman: ________________________________ and  spaces.  This  was  once  widely  used  to  get  news  and 
information  and  listen  to  music.  Nowadays,  many  devices 
Forget the elevator. Let’s take the stairs.
are taking its place, but some people still use it.
Can you press the button for the 7th floor?
Will you hold the door for me, please? microphone fax machine digital camera
We’re waiting for both of the elevators.  laser printer radio
Something’s wrong. I feel dizzy in this elevator.
Man: ___________________________________
Take your time. Your voice will get better.
Now, I see why your voice is always strong. He[he]
You’d better see a doctor for your sore throat.
Kameron once worked hard for several weeks building a 
Thanks. I’ll do my best to become a voice actor.
wall  made  of  railroad  ties  in  his  backyard.  When  he 
You should have tried a warm towel for your throat.
was  almost  finished,  his  neighbor,  Mr.  Brown,  regretfully 
asked him if he could please take out the railroad ties and 
use  rocks  instead.  He  simply  explained  that  his  wife 
did  not  want  to  look  at  a  railroad  tie  wall  for  the  rest  of 
her  life.  Kameron  could  not  believe  the  nerve  of  this 
Woman: ___________________________________
neighbor  to  ask  such  a  thing  when  he  had  almost 
Are you sure authors carry their stamps? finished the wall. Although he did not fully understand his 
I’m afraid they won’t sell stamps any more. reasoning,  he  knew  the  Browns  would  be  his  neighbors 
Let me ask the clerk what the title of the book is.  for  a  long  time.  Although  it  cost  him  another  week  of 
Good. Now, I can exchange it with another one. extra  work,  he  did  what  the  neighbors  requested  and 
Thanks. It’s considerate of you to keep my receipt. replaced the ties with rocks.(A) (B) (C)
To  watch  a  play  is  to  step  into  a  world  that  seems  far 
If  you  need  to  buy  food,  there  is  probably  a  shop  or  a  removed  from  electronic  beeping  and  ringing.  Of  course, 
department  store  close  to  your  home  that  sells  just  this  is  assuming  that  theatergoers  remember  to  turn  off 
(A)which/what  you  want.  But  shopping  has  not  always  their  cell  phones.  At  a  theater  in  Goyang,  however,  stage 
been  so  easy.  Shops  started  only  with  the  introduction  of  managers  have  been  begging  the  audience  to  leave  their 
money.  In  earlier  times,  people  traded  crops  or  objects  phones  on.  During  the  performance,  everybody  is  expected 
they  had  made  in  exchange  for  the  goods  they  needed.  to  take  out  their  mobiles,  call  into  a  computer,  and  using 
The  first  shops  sold  just  (B)a  few/a  little  products  such  their  keypads,  direct  the  movements  of  puzzle  pieces  on 
as  meat  and  bread.  In  1850,  the  first  department  store,  a  the  screen  behind  the  stage.  At  some  point,  an  ordinary 
shop  which  sells  many  different  items  under  one  roof,  housewife  appears  on  the  screen,  connected  from  her 
opened  in  Paris.  Self-service  stores  developed  in  the  kitchen  via  the  Internet,  and  interacts  with  actors  on  the 
United States in the 1930s. They replaced the old methods  stage  in  real  time.  The  50-minute  production  combines 
of  serving  customers  individually by (C)selling/being sold  ______________ with live actors, audiences, and the stage.
prepackaged goods straight from the shelves.
the latest digital technology
    (A)           (B)                 (C) the best historical theory
which a little being sold the oldest theatrical history
what a few being sold the most ordinary housework
what a few selling the most important information
what a little selling
which a little selling When  you  choose  an  item  among  a  number  of  options, 
the attractive features of the rejected items will decrease the 
satisfaction  derived  from  the  chosen  item.  This  is  a  very 
important reason why many options ____________________. 
Because  we  do  not  put  rejected  items  out  of  our  minds, 
we experience the disappointment of having our satisfaction 
with  decisions  reduced  by  all  the  options  we  considered 
Chocolate  can  last  in  a  cool,  dry  place  for  up  to  a  year. 
but  did  not  choose.  In  light  of  these  negative  effects  of 
When  the  temperature  in  your  cupboard averages  above 
opportunity  cost,  which  is  the  cost  of  the  opportunity  you 
75  degrees  Fahrenheit,  chocolate  may  quickly  develop  thin 
lost  by  making  one  choice  instead  of  another,  we  are 
white  layers caused  by  the  separation  of  cocoa  butter. 
tempted  to  ignore  opportunity  costs  altogether  in  making 
You  can  still  eat  this  chocolate,  even  though  it  should  not 
decisions.
be  used  for  decorations, as  it  tends  to  break  easily. 
Though chocolate may be kept in the refrigerator or freezer, 
can be harmful to our well-being
it  will  take  on  the  smells  of  other  foods  in  time,  so  taste 
are open to consumer age groups
before  using.  Also, making  sure  to  bring  chocolate  to 
are handed down through generations
room  temperature  before  eating,  as  frozen  bits  of  chocolate 
can be offered by satisfied consumers
always strike me as rather hard and tasteless.
can contribute to the local economy
Excessive  consumption  of  what  Chinese  Medicine 
considers  to  be  cold-energy  foods  and  raw  foods  such  as 
salads,  ice-creams,  iced  drinks,  or  fruit  may  weaken  the 
spleen.  This  idea  runs  counter  to  all  modern  ideas  about 
Ideally, the family is a cooperative,  trouble-free  unit  that  diet, according to which, by eating raw vegetables and fruit, 
shelters its members from the stresses of the outside world,  we  can  absorb  all  the  vitamins  and  minerals  contained  in 
but  real  families  seldom  achieve  this  ideal. Periodic  them.  This  is  true  to  a  certain  extent,  and  moderate 
conflicts  are  the  rule,  not  the  exception. Indeed,  open  consumption  of  these  foods  can  be  beneficial.  However, 
disagreements  and  discussions  are  an  excellent  way  of  from  the  Chinese  point  of  view,  the  spleen  likes  dryness 
resolving  the  differences  that  inevitably  develop  among  and warmth in food and dislikes excess of liquids and cold. 
family  members. Families  that  avoid  conflict  by  An  excessive  consumption  of  the  above  foods  will  be  very 
ignoring  unpleasant  subjects  or  situations  are  weaker,  not  difficult  to  digest  and  may  weaken  the  spleen.  Thus, 
stronger,  for  it. The  family  system  is  very  much  in  particularly  those  who  have  a  tendency  to  spleen  problems 
tune  with  the  social  and  economic  institutions  of  modern  ________________________. [3 ] 
spleen: 
industrialized  society. As  feelings  of  anger  build,  such 
families  are  likely  to  turn  into  an  empty  shell,  in  which  should ignore chemical elements in food
family members carry out the obligations of their roles but  need to take more minerals and vegetables
without  mutual  love  or  understanding.  Thus,  an  open  should not take organic foods and vitamin pills
airing  of  disagreements  is  an  excellent  way  to  manage  should not consume raw and cold foods in excess
family conflict and keep it within acceptable bounds. need to consume vegetables instead of vitamin pillsWe are self-centered interpreters of all incoming information.         (A)          (B)
At  any  given  moment,  we  may  note  only  one  aspect  of  a  In addition However
current  flow  of  information,  depending  on  our  view  of  For example However
ourselves,  our  attention,  and  our  emotional  state  in  a 
For example In other words
specific  situation.  Later,  we  may  note  still  other  aspects  of 
In contrast In other words
a  similar  flow  of  information.  Then,  when  an  attempt  to 
In addition Therefore
recall  the  second  moment  is  confused  with  the  memory  of 
the  original  moment,  our  brain  starts  to  create  a  tale  to 
take  in  different  aspects  of  both  the  original  situation  and 
the  second  moment.  We  suddenly  confuse  the  two 
episodes,  as  we  begin  to  put  the  two  sets  of  events  into 
some  kind  of  memory  mixture.  Alas,  ___________  are  an 
ideal, not a reality of the human condition.
peaceful feelings various characters
strong motivations accurate memories
mixed emotions
(A) (B) (C)
It  is  surprising  just  how  tolerant  some  cats  and  kittens 
can  be  with  babies  and  young  children,  but  this  is  not 
The  above  flower  spreads  out  into  a  circle  when  you 
something  you  should  put  to  the  test.  You  must  teach 
look  straight  into  its  face.  The  buttonlike  structure  sitting 
children  not  to  (A)disturb/adopt  the  cat especially  by 
right  in  the middle  of  the  flower  is  actually  formed 
grabbing  at  him  when he is resting in his  bed.  Discourage 
from  many  tiny  flowers  called  disk  flowers.  The  disk 
young  children  from  picking  up  kittens  and  cats,  because 
flowers include  petals  which  are  actually  individual 
they  may  (B)squeeze/release  them  too  hard  around  the 
flowers  called  ray  flowers.  The  ray  flowers  radiate  out 
belly  and  make  them  hate  being  carried  for  life.  Instead, 
from  the  rim  of  the  disk flowers  and  reach  to  the edge 
encourage  the  cat  to  climb  on  the  child’s  lap  and  remain 
of  the  whole  flower.  You  can  draw  the  flower  easily  with 
there to be petted. Show children how to stroke the cat and 
the  following  procedure.  First,  draw  two  dotted  lines  that 
how to pick him up and carry him. The cat should never be 
will quarter  the  flower,  imagining  its  shape.  This 
held  down  during  these  (C)substitutions/encounters;  be  sure 
enables  you  to  draw  the  ray  flowers  correctly  and  keep 
that  the  child  understands  that  he  or  she  must  allow  the 
track  of  where  you  are.  Next,  draw  two  circle  guidelines: 
cat to walk away whenever he wishes.
The  inner one indicates the outline of the disk flowers, 
     (A)   (B)       (C) and the outer one, the extent of the ray flowers. Then, fill 
the  inner  circle  with  disk  flowers  and  the  outer  one  with 
disturb release substitutions
ray flowers.
disturb squeeze encounters
petal: rim:
   
disturb squeeze substitutions
adopt squeeze encounters
adopt release substitutions
(A) (B) I  took  a  room  in  the  Draco  Hotel,  a  pleasant  hotel  and 
a  pleasant  room:  small  but  comfortable,  with  a  telephone, 
The  lawyer  had  a  unique  place  within  American  society.  a  small  color  television,  and  its  own  bathroom.  I  was 
In  a  country  without  a  landed  aristocracy,  lawyers  formed  highly  pleased  and  full  of  expectations  about  being  in  a 
a  privileged  but  public-spirited  class.  In  every  town  and  new  place.  I  dumped  my  things  and  went  out  to  look 
city  in  America,  they  were  the  leading  citizens  who  around the town. I soon came to be grateful for not living 
helped  to  build  the  museums  and  hospitals,  formed  civic  there.  It  was  entirely  the  opposite  of  my  expectations.  The 
institutions,  and  moved  in  and  out  of  government  at  all  hotel  was  in  a  dark  neighborhood  of  shipping  offices  and 
levels.  (A) , James C. Carter was a distinguished  warehouses.  There  were  also  a  couple  of  banks,  a  very 
New  York  lawyer  in  the  late  19th  century.  He  helped  to  large  police  station  with  its  paint  peeling  off,  and  a 
found the Bar of the City of New York and played a key  weather-beaten  post  office  with  a  row  of  telephone  booths 
role  in  reform  movements  in  the  city  and  the  state,  in  front.  I  noticed  that  the  telephone  books  in  the  booths 
including the Citizens Union, the City Club, and the Good  had been torn or burned and hung from their chains. 
Government  Clubs.  (B) ,  his  public  life  took  up 
thankful  apologetic lost  pleased
a  good  part  of  his  work  life.  And  he  was  not  unusual. 
tense  relieved indifferent  irritated
Lawyers  like  him  could  be  found  in  New  York  and  in 
every town in America.               aristocracy:  satisfied  disappointedhow to avoid work pressure
dangers of lifestyle magazines
Many  people  may  have  had  the  experience  of  buying 
difficulties of success in business
products  that  fell  apart  after  hardly  any  use.  Although  the 
importance of social networking
manufacture  and  sale  of  such  products  do  not  violate  the 
law,  intentionally  making  false  claims  for  a  product  is  how to increase the number of customers
fraud.  Some  frauds  endanger  the  health  and  even  the  lives 
of  citizens.  Some  drug  companies  have,  for  example, 
frequently  been  caught  making  false  claims  about  their 
products  or  hiding  information  to  cover  up  their  dangers. 
Although companies are supposed to seek profits, they still 
need  to  be  morally  responsible.  Everybody  must  be  a 
good  citizen  concerned  with  the  health  and  welfare  of  all. 
As  members  of  society,  companies  should  be  no  less 
concerned.
Urban-rural  differences  in  child-growth  patterns  have 
The above graph shows the ‘operating margin’ represented 
been  known  for  more  than  a  century.  While  urban-rural 
by  the  line  and  the  ‘net  profit’  by  the  bars  in  the 
differences  are  well  known,  the  extent  of  the  differences 
international  airline  industry  from  1999  to  2007. In  1999, 
between urban and rural samples varies according to specific 
the  operating  margin  reached  its  highest  point. Since 
features  that  characterize  the  urban  and  rural  communities. 
1999,  the  operating  margin  decreased  until  2001  and  then 
Thus,  urban-rural  differences  may  be  non-existent,  as  they 
continually  increased. The  operating  margin  was  negative 
often  are  in  contemporary  comparisons  involving  children 
from  2001  to  2003,  being  the  lowest  in  2002.  The 
from long-industrialized countries. Or they may be substantial 
operating  margin  of  2007  was  not  as  high  as  that  of 
as they frequently were in American and European countries 
1999. The  net  profit  was  the  highest  in  1999  and  the 
100 years ago, or as they are today in developing countries. 
lowest  in  2001.  During  the  period  from  2001  to  2006, 
In these developing countries, there may be large differences 
the net profit was negative.
in  nutrition,  medical  care,  pollutant  exposure,  parental 
characteristics,  and  energy  use.  With  this  in  mind, 
generalization about urban-rural differences is difficult.
Colton,  a  city  in  California,  is  currently  involved  in  a 
series  of  legal  battles  over  how  much  it  should  be 
prepared  to  pay  to  save  an  endangered  fly:  the  Delhi 
Sands  Flower-loving  Fly,  a  rather  pretty  insect  that  takes 
nectar  from  local  flowers.  This  tiny  creature  has  the 
distinction  of  being  the  first  fly  to  be  declared  an 
endangered  species  in  the  U.S.  Shortly  after  this  fly  was 
If  you  read  lifestyle  magazines,  you  will  see  how  often 
listed  as  an  endangered  species,  construction  of  a  hospital 
prominent  people  meet  up  with  other  prominent  people. 
parking  lot  was  stopped.  The  hospital  had  planned  to 
That  is  the  secret  for  building  up  a  network.  It  is  through 
construct  its  parking  lot  over  seven  acres  of  occupied  fly 
these  meetings  that  prominent  people  become  prominent  in 
habitat, but that suddenly became illegal. The hospital then 
the  first  place!  You  might  write  a  bestseller,  make  a 
had  to  spend  $4  million  redrawing  its  plans  and  moving 
fantastic  appearance  on  television,  hold  seminars  that  are 
its parking lot 250 feet.
so  good  that  they  become  legendary,  or  have  incredible 
nectar:
 
success in business. But if you are isolated in your private 
Colton
life afterwards, your success will not last long. Networking 
should  not  be  regarded  as  a  search  for  customers  or 
partners,  but  rather  as  a  win-win  situation  from  which 
everyone can benefit.
prominent: Porto
Once  a  famous  merchant  port  of  the  Portuguese  empire, 
Porto  today  gives  the  impression  of  a  forgotten  city.  It 
was  built  where  the  slow-moving  Duoro  River  flows  to 
the  Atlantic  through  the  steep  hills  guarding  the  seashore. 
It  still  carries  the  features  of  a  busy  medieval  town  in  a 
strategically  important  location  for  defense.  With  its 
magnificent castles overlooking the river and a rich history 
of  wine  making,  one  might  expect  it  to  be  one  of  the 
most  visited  cities  in  the  world.  But  hidden  as  it  is  in  the  Older  workers,  in  contrast,  more  often  have  skills  that 
northwest  corner  of  the  Iberian  Peninsula,  few  tourists  are  quite  specific  to  the  industry  or  firm  in  which 
make the trip.  they are currently employed.
Younger  workers  tend  to  have  more  general  skills  and 
Duoro .
are  less  certain  about  where  their  skills  might  be  put  to 
their  best  uses.  ( )  Hence,  they  tend  to  move  between 
jobs  on  a  regular  basis.  ( )  But  when  they  leave  their 
old job, they have little trouble finding a new one. ( ) 
They  already  know  their  best  employment  option  and  are 
not  inclined  to  move  around  between  jobs.  ( )  When 
they  do  leave  work,  however,  finding  a  position  that 
I’m  not  suggesting  that  you  have  to  watch  the  news 
matches  well  with  their  precise  skills  is  often  difficult  and 
constantly,  but  by  reading,  listening,  and  talking,  we  keep 
time-consuming.  ( )  Thus,  unemployment  that  is  a 
up  with  what’s  happening.  Successful  people  don’t  get 
nuisance  for  a  younger  worker  can  be  a  damaging  and 
stuck  by  the  unimportant  details  of  their  own  lives,  and 
financially draining experience for a mature worker.
they  don’t  live  in  a  tiny  bubble.  Make  it  your  mission  to 
nuisance:
 
know  what’s  going  on  in  the  world in  current  events, 
music,  fashion,  science,  food,  transport,  and  even  TV. 
Successful  people  are  able  to  hold  a  conversation  pretty 
well  on  everything  and  anything  because  they’re  interested 
in  what’s  going  on.  You  don’t  necessarily  have  to  own 
Ralph  was  asked  to  work  on  the  citizens’  general 
the  latest  everything,  but  you  should  have  a  rough  idea  of 
dissatisfaction  with  the  effectiveness  of  city 
what’s  changing,  what’s  new,  and  what’s  happening,  both 
government.  After  spending  some  time  with  people  in 
in your community and on the other side of the world.   
the  city,  he  found  one  of  the  problems  was  the 
performance of the city planning department.
(A) Ralph  determined  that  the  citizens’  complaints  were 
justified,  so  he  trained  the  city  planners  in  setting 
objectives,  selecting  alternatives,  data  analysis,  and 
coordination.  At  the  end  of  the  training,  one  of  them 
said,  “We’ll  use  this  in  the  future.  I’m  not  going  to 
For  decades,  critics  have  been  predicting  the  death  of 
be drawing boxes any more.”
classical music, suggesting that the classical music audience 
has  grown  old  with  no  younger  generation  to  take  its  (B) Another  one  said,  “The  most  important  thing  is  that 
place.  They  point  out  that  orchestras  are  debt-burdened,  we’ve  learned  how  to  coordinate.”  Ralph  saw  that 
that  major  record  labels  are  cutting-back  or  cutting-out  the  immediate,  short-term  payoff  for  the  planning 
their  classical  operations,  and  that  the  number  of  radio  department  was  to  become  more  responsive  to  the 
stations  with  classical  programming  is  decreasing.  The  community and its growth.
critics  conclude  that  classical  music  is  no  longer  popular. 
(C) Many  citizens  complained  that  the  planners  were 
What  these  critics  seem  entirely  ignorant  of,  however,  is 
experts  at  ‘drawing  pictures,’  that  is,  physical  planning 
that  the  worldly  and  educated,  so-called  ‘Generation-Y’  is 
and  design,  but  did  nothing  to  coordinate  what  they 
more  apt  to  take  an  interest  in  classical  music,  and  as 
were doing. 
more  and  more  classical  organizations  take  the  initiative  to 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) (B) (C) (A)
capitalize  on  this,  the  future  is  beginning  to  look 
promising.  (C) (A) (B) (C) (B) (A)Myths in Modern Popular Culture
Ancient Myths vs. Modern Myths
The  stories  you  will  read  here  are  based  on  facts  from 
Myths: Past, Present, and Future
eyewitness  accounts.  They  have  been  collected  from  a 
The Mystery of Mono-myths
wide  variety  of  employees  and  organizations  across  the 
Powers of Advertisements 
United  States.  The  names  and,  in  some  cases,  genders 
have  been  changed  to  protect  the  identities  of  the 
individuals.  These  accounts  are  only  a  small  sampling  of 
general  practices  currently  in  operation  in  American 
Business,  and  do  not  reflect  an  experience  within  any 
particular  company.  While  these  stories  expose  the  darker 
side  of  American  Business,  this  book  does  not  offer  legal  Away  across  a  hundred  miles,  the  mountain  tops  looked 
advice. Any reader who feels she or he needs legal advice  like  islands  in  the  fog  that  floated  below  us.  Grandpa 
should consult legal counsel. pointed  to  the  east  and  said,  “Watch.”  Above  the  rim  of 
the  farthest  mountain,  on  the  end  of  the  world,  a  pink 
stripe  swept  across,  and  a  paint  brush  swept  a  million 
miles  across  the  sky.  The  morning  birth  came  alive,  and 
morning  wind  picked  up.  The  mountain  rim  looked  like  it 
had  caught  fire;  then  the  sun  cleared  the  trees.  It  turned 
the  fog  into  a  pink  ocean,  with  its  waves  gently  rolling 
up  and  down.  Grandpa  said  the  world  had  got  born  all 
over  again,  and  he  took  off  his  hat  and  we  watched  the 
sunrise for a long time.
  Nicknames and their associated identities, in the emerging 
monotonous spectacular festive
medium of online communication, have become an important 
noisy gloomy
means  in  identifying  the  participants  in  online  chat  rooms 
and  newsgroups.  H.  Bays,  a  sociolinguist,  observes  that 
online,  a  nickname  can  be  anything  from  numbers  and 
punctuation  to  a  highly  personal  or  expressive  name  and 
potentially  contains  numerous  sociological  cues  such  as 
(A)
gender,  approximate  age,  music  and  sports  interests. 
(B)
Examples  may  include  snowwhite12,  lion66,  musiclover33, 
and  Birdie_sunneyman.  She  further  points  out  that  the 
nickname  is  the  first  sign  of  individuality  when  one    Anchoring settling to a certain price range influences 
encounters another participant. It serves as a first impression  all  kinds  of  purchases.  Uri  Simonsohn  and  George 
and shows the aspect of ‘face’ that the participant wants to  Lowenstein,  for  example,  found  that  people  who  move 
present online. from  inexpensive  areas  to  moderately  priced  cities  do 
not  increase  their  spending  to  fit  the  new  area.  Rather, 
Conveniences of Online Communication
these  people  spend  an  amount  similar  to  what  they 
Online Newsgroups
were  used  to  in  their  previous  area,  even  if  this  means 
Origins of Nicknames 
having  to  squeeze  themselves  and  their  families  into 
Nicknames and Gender smaller  or  less  comfortable  homes.  Likewise,  people 
Online Nicknames and Identities moving  from  more  expensive  cities  sink  the  same 
amount  of  dollars  into  their  new  housing  situations  as 
they  did  in  the  past.  People  who  move  from  an 
While  we  generally  equate  myths  with  the  ancient 
expensive area do not generally downsize their spending 
Greeks  or  Romans,  modern  myths  are  realized  in  many 
much once they move to a moderately priced city.
aspects  of  popular  culture,  including  trademarks,  movies, 
comic  books,  holidays,  and even  commercials.  Commercials 
and  advertisements  can  be  analyzed  in  terms  of  the 
underlying mythic themes they represent. Often fashion ads,  People  who          (A)          to  a  new  region  generally 
especially  perfume  ads,  use  fantasy  and  mythical  themes.  remain anchored to the prices in their       (B)      
Comic  book  superheroes  also  demonstrate  how  myths  can  location.
be  communicated  to  consumers  of  all  ages.  Indeed,  some 
of these fictional characters represent a mono-myth, a myth 
      (A)          (B)
that  is  common  to  many  cultures.  The  most  prevalent 
move former
mono-myth involves a hero who emerges from the everyday 
move future
world with supernatural powers and wins a decisive victory 
contribute current
over  evil  forces.  Comic  book  heroes,  familiar  to  most 
contribute former
consumers,  may  even  be  more  credible  and  effective  than 
real-life celebrities. adjust future(A) (B)
     (A)             (B)
(A)
receive give
When  it  comes  to  talking,  I  have  observed  two  basic 
talk listen
personality  types.  The  first  I  call  the  ‘Dead  Sea.’  People 
accept reject
with  this  personality  type  have  many  experiences, 
think act
emotions,  and  thoughts  throughout  the  day.  They  have  a 
praise argue
large  reservoir  where  they  store  that  information,  and 
they  are  perfectly  happy  not  to  talk.  On  the  other 
extreme  is  the  ‘Babbling  Brook.’  For  this  personality, 
whatever  enters  into  the  eye  gate  or  the  ear  gate  comes 
Person A Most  people  access  the  Internet  at  public 
out the mouth gate. 
libraries  to  get  information. (A) , lawmakers  are 
(B) threatening  the  democratic  mission  of  libraries  by  forcing 
them  to  use  blocking  programs.  These  programs  prevent 
Many  times  a  Dead  Sea  marries  a  Babbling  Brook. 
access to many services on the Internet, including websites 
That  happens  because  when  they  are  dating,  it  is  a  very 
dealing  with  art,  literature,  women’s  health,  religion,  and 
attractive  match.  If  you  are  a  Dead  Sea  and  you  date  a 
free speech. Public libraries should provide information to 
Babbling  Brook,  (a)you  will  have  a  wonderful  evening. 
all.  What  if  you  cannot  afford  a  home  computer  and 
You  do  not  have  to  think,  “How  will  I  get  the 
your  only  choice  is  to  use  one  at  the  library?  If  this 
conversation  started  tonight?  How  will  I  keep  the 
computer  has  blocking  programs,  then  you  are  being 
conversation  flowing?”  In  fact,  (b)you  do  not  have  to 
denied the access that people with home computers have.  
think  at  all.  All  you  have  to  do  is  nod  your  head  and 
say,  “Uh-huh,”  and  she  will  fill  up  the  whole  evening 
and  (c)you  will  go  home  saying,  “What  a  wonderful 
Person B No  one  can  deny  that  public  library  Internet 
person!” 
access  is  of  great  use,  but  there  is  a  serious  problem 
with  access  to  all  Internet  services  at  public  libraries. 
(C)
Some  users  take  advantage  of  this  privilege  by  sending 
But  five  years  after  marriage,  the  Babbling  Brook 
spam  mail,  using  e-mail  to  abuse  people,  and  hacking 
wakes  up  one  morning  and  says,  “We’ve  been  married 
into  government  and  corporate  systems. (B) , many 
five  years,  and  I  don’t  know  (d)you.”  The  Dead  Sea  is 
innocent  children  using  the  Internet  without  supervision 
saying, “I know you too well. I wish you would stop the 
can  easily  become  victims  of  website  operators  with 
flow  and  give  me  a  break.” The  good  news  is  that  Dead 
criminal  intentions.  The  public  library  is  not  a  private 
Seas can learn to   (A)   and Babbling Brooks can learn 
home.  The  most  effective  way  to  safeguard  Internet  users 
to   (B)  . We are influenced by our personality but not 
at a public library is through blocking programs. 
controlled by it.
(D)
On the other hand, if you are a Babbling Brook and you  necessity of Internet blocking programs at public libraries
date  a  Dead  Sea,  you  will  have  an  equally  wonderful 
use of the Internet without parents’ supervision
evening  because  Dead  Seas  are  the  world’s  best  listeners. 
importance of public libraries in communities
You  will  talk  continuously  for  three  hours.  He  will  listen 
effects of the Internet on classroom activities
intently  to  you,  and  (e)you  will  go  home  saying,  “What 
role of government in improving public library systems
a wonderful person!” You attract each other. 
(A) (B)
(A)
     (A)                 (B)
However Furthermore
(B) (C) (D) (B) (D) (C)
Likewise As a result 
(C) (B) (D) (C) (D) (B)
In fact Nevertheless
(D) (B) (C)
Likewise Furthermore
However Nevertheless
(a) (e)
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)1
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
He’s a gardener.
①
She’s taking a picture.
②
It’s next to Central Zoo.
③
It’s open 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
④
I’m not free this weekend.
⑤
2. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Good idea. You can teach me French later.
①
① 경고 방송하기 ② 게시판 만들기
Okay. I’ll make a reservation for five people.
②
③ 경고문 복사하기 ④  사무실 청소하기
No problem. They’ve already had lunch.
③
⑤  불법 광고물 제거하기
Of course. I really love these five books.
④
No. They didn’t come to the meeting.
⑤
8. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 청력이 나빠진 이유를 고르시오. 
① 시끄러운 음악을 헤드폰을 쓰고 자주 들어서
3. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
② 도서관 공사 소음에 오랫동안 노출되어서
고르시오. 
③  과도한 업무에 대한 스트레스 때문에
① 글쓰기 특강 참석을 독려하려고 ④ 귓속에 이물질이 들어가서
② 효과적인 학습 전략을 소개하려고 ⑤ 신체 노화로 인하여
③ 교내 수학 동아리 회원을 모집하려고
④ 온라인 설문 조사 일정을 공지하려고
⑤ 장학금 신청 방법 변경 사항을 안내하려고 9. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$54 $60 $70 $81 $90
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
I Care, We Cure
10. 대화를 듣고,  ‘ ’  행사에 관해 언급되지 않은 
① 좋은 대본을 쓰려면 다양한 경험이 필요하다.
것을 고르시오.
② 충분한 수면은 기억력 강화에 도움이 된다.
③ 반복적인 연습은 좋은 결과를 낳는다. ①  목적 ②  프로그램 ③  장소
④ 건강을 위해서 일찍 일어나야 한다.  ④  초청 강사 ⑤  입장료
⑤ 실수는 성공의 밑거름이 된다.
Orange Tree Day Care Center
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
Green Oak Park 
①  편집장－기자 ①  옆에 위치해 있다.
②  서점 직원－학생 ②  연령에 알맞은 다양한 활동을 제공한다.
③  인쇄소 직원－교사 ③  울타리가 있는 놀이터가 있다.
④  기계 수리공－경비원 ④  점심 식사와 함께 신선한 과일을 제공한다.
⑤  실내 디자이너－건축가 ⑤  월요일부터 토요일까지 문을 연다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택한 프로그램을  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
고르시오.
Dear Mr. Stevens, 
This is the chief editor of Novel Flash Fiction. As you 
were informed by our staff last week, your short story will be 
① published in the December issue of Novel Flash Fiction. We 
② thought hearing how you came up with your story would be 
③ meaningful to our readers. We would thus like to ask if you 
④ could give a speech about your writing process. This speech 
⑤ is expected to last for about an hour, and it will take place at 
Star Bookstore downtown. You can choose a specific date 
and time depending on your  schedule. If you have any 
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
questions, please contact us by e-mail at editors@nff.com. 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
We look forward to hearing how you wrote your story. 
Woman:
Sincerely, 
I’ll record your performance with my phone.
① Susanna Martinez
We’ll look for pictures of famous pianists.
②
I still have time to visit my uncle. ①  소설 창작 과정에 관한 강연을 요청하려고
③
Your parents will get well soon. ②  강연 일정이 변경된 것에 대해 사과하려고 
④
③  새로 발간된 잡지의 정기 구독을 권유하려고
The audience was not so big.
⑤
④  출판물 편집에 관한 유의 사항을 안내하려고
⑤  잘못된 기사 내용에 대해 정정을 요구하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
Kate
19. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
Sipping coffee leisurely at a cafe, Kate was enjoying the 
Man:
view of the Ponte Vecchio across the Arno. As an architect 
Sure. I often let my students go home early.
① and professor, she had taught about the historical significance 
Exactly. The video clip wasn’t helpful at all.
② of the bridge to her students for years. A smile crept across 
True. The professor was praised for his hard work. her face. It was her first time to actually see it in person. 
③
Yeah. You should’ve gone to the lecture yesterday. Though not as old as the bridges of Rome, it was absolutely a 
④
work of art. If the fleeing Nazis had destroyed it during World 
Right. We shouldn’t focus only on results when praising students.
⑤
War II, she would have never seen it. She was happy that she 
could view the bridge in the twilight. Free from her daily 
Lucy Ben
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가 에게 할 말로 가장 적절한  concerns, her mind began to wander from the unforgettable 
것을 고르시오. views  of  the  still  Arno  to  all  the  unexpected  but  pleasant 
Lucy: encounters with other tourists. The trip was a rare liberating 
experience. Kate felt that all her concerns had melted away. 
Sorry. Your flight is canceled due to bad weather.
① 
Come on. We need to leave for the airport now. anxious and envious bored and indifferent
②  ①  ② 
That’s okay. They arrived there on time. pleased and relaxed confused and puzzled
③  ③  ④ 
disappointed and regretful
Welcome. Thank you for flying with us. ⑤ 
④ 
Never mind. We can meet on Saturday.
⑤ 
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Sure, we’ve all heard the advice: “Follow your passion.” It’s 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
great when you hit the jackpot and find a career that melds your 
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? strengths and passions, and where there is demand in the highly 
competitive global marketplace of today. But if your goal is to get 
necessity of teaching hunting skills
①
a job at the end of the rainbow, you must distinguish between your 
various ways to feed young animals
② 
major, your passions, your strengths, and your career path. Your 
animal fathers’ dedication to parenting
③  strengths are more important than your passions. Studies show 
sacrifice of animal mothers for their babies
④  that the best career choices tend to be grounded in things you’re 
⑤  importance of animal reproduction in the wild good at, more so than your interests and passions. Ideally, you want 
to find a convergence of your strengths and your values with a 
career path that is in demand. Interests can come and go. Your 
17. 언급된 동물이 아닌  것은?
strengths are your core, your hard-wired assets.
emperor penguin bullfrog
①  ② 
seahorse giant water bug *meld: 섞다  **convergence: 합류점
③  ④ 
sea catfish
⑤  ① 진로 계획을 세울 때 시장의 수요를 정확히 예측해야 한다.
② 직업을 선택할 때 본인의 강점을 우선적으로 고려해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에  ③ 자신의 분야에서 성공하기 위해서는 열정을 가져야 한다.
④ 원하는 직업을 갖기 위해서는 전공을 잘 선택해야 한다.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 취업을 준비할 때 다른 사람의 조언을 잘 들어야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Parents are quick to inform friends and relatives as soon as  If  you’ve  ever  seen  the  bank  of  flashing  screens  at  a 
their infant holds her head up, reaches for objects, sits by  broker’s desk, you have a sense of the information overload 
herself, and walks alone. Parental enthusiasm for these motor  they are up against. When deciding whether to invest in a 
accomplishments is not at all misplaced, for they are, indeed,  company, for example, they may take into account the people 
milestones of development. With each additional skill, babies 
at the helm; the current and potential size of its market; net 
gain control over their bodies and the environment in a new 
profits; and its past, present, and future stock value, among 
way. Infants who are able to sit alone are granted an entirely 
other pieces of information. Weighing all of these factors can 
different perspective on the world than are those who spend 
take up so much of your working memory that it becomes 
much of their day on their backs or stomachs. Coordinated 
overwhelmed.  Think  of  having  piles  and  piles  of  papers, 
reaching opens up a whole new avenue for exploration of 
sticky notes, and spreadsheets strewn about your desk, and 
objects, and when babies can move about, their opportunities 
you get a picture of what’s going on inside the brain. When 
for independent exploration and manipulation are multiplied. 
information overloads working memory this way, it can make 
No longer are they restricted to their immediate locale and to 
brokers and the rest of us scrap all the strategizing and 
― ―
objects  that  others  place  before  them.  As  new  ways  of 
analyses and go for emotional, or gut, decisions.
controlling the environment are achieved, motor development 
provides the infant with a growing sense of competence and  *at the helm: 실권을 가진  **strewn: 표면을 뒤덮은
mastery, and it contributes in important ways to the infant’s 
How Information Overload Can Cloud Your Judgment
①
perceptual and cognitive understanding of the world. 
Multitasking Increases Your Working Memory!
② 
*locale: 현장, 장소 ③ How to Prevent Information Flood 
Do Flashing Screens Reduce Information Overload?
④
①  유아의 운동 능력 발달은 유아의 다른 발달에 기여한다.
Emotional Judgment: The Secret of Successful Brokers
②  부모와의 정서적 교감은 유아의 지적 호기심을 자극한다. ⑤
③  부모의 관심은 유아의 균형 있는 신체 발달에 필수적이다.
④  주변 환경의 변화는 유아기 운동 능력 발달을 촉진한다. 24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 
⑤  유아는 시행착오를 통해 공간 지각 능력을 발달시킨다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
It is a strategic and tactical mistake to give an offensive 
position away to those who will use it to attack, criticize, and 
blame. Since opponents will undoubtedly attack, criticize, and 
blame, anyway, the advantages of being proactive, airing one’s 
own “dirty laundry,” and “telling on oneself” are too significant 
to ignore. Chief among these advantages is the ability to control 
the first messages and how a story is first framed. That leaves 
others having to respond to you instead of the other way around. 
This  approach  is  appropriately  termed  “stealing  thunder.” 
When an organization steals thunder, it breaks the news about 
its own crisis before the crisis is discovered by the media or 
other interested parties. In experimental research by Arpan and 
The above graph shows direct expenditures on education as a 
Roskos-Ewoldsen,  stealing  thunder  in  a  crisis  situation,  as 
percentage  of  GDP  for  the  five  OECD  countries  with  the 
opposed to allowing the information to be first disclosed by 
highest percentages in 2011, by level of education. All the 
①
another  party,  resulted  in  substantially  higher  credibility 
five countries spent over seven percent of their GDP on direct 
ratings.  As  significant,  the  authors  found  that  “credibility 
expenditures on education for all institutions combined. Of 
②
ratings  associated  with  stealing  thunder  directly  predicted 
the five countries, Denmark spent the highest percentage of GDP 
perceptions of the crisis as less severe.” 
for all institutions combined. In terms of direct expenditures 
③
*dirty laundry: 치부, 수치스러운 일 on elementary and secondary education, New Zealand spent 
the highest percentage of GDP among the five countries. As 
necessity of being cooperative in a crisis situation ④
①
importance of taking the initiative in managing a crisis for direct expenditures on postsecondary education, Iceland 
②
problem of creating false stories to save an organization spent a higher percentage of GDP than the other four countries.
③
significance of remaining silent in strengthening credibility Compared with the Republic of Korea, Israel spent a lower 
④ ⑤
advantage of improving the corporate image through media percentage of GDP on postsecondary education.
⑤
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
Albert C. Barnes Summerville Forest Trail Tour
25. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
Born into a working-class family in 1872, Albert C. Barnes  일치하는 것은?
grew up in Philadelphia. He became interested in art when he 
Summerville Forest Trail Tour
became friends with future artist William Glackens in high 
school. He earned a medical degree from the University of  Just five miles away from the big city, you can enjoy 
Pennsylvania  and  qualified  as  a  doctor  in  1892.  Barnes  the huge variety of plants and wildlife at Summerville 
decided not to work as a doctor, and after further study he  Forest. We offer a trail tour every Saturday from June to 
entered the business world. In 1901, he invented the antiseptic  September. Come and join us!
Argyrol with a German chemist and made a fortune. Using his 
Tickets
wealth, he began purchasing hundreds of paintings. In 1922, 
$10 (for 8 and older)
?
he established the Barnes Foundation to promote the education 
$5 (for children under 8)
?
of fine arts. There he displayed his huge collection without 
* Snacks and water will be provided.
detailed explanation. He died in a car accident in 1951.
Tour Schedule
*antiseptic: 소독제, 방부제 8:30a.m. 9:00 a.m. Introduction to Summerville Forest
? －
1872 Philadelphia 9:00a.m. 11:00 a.m. Trail Walking Tour
① 년에 태어나  에서 성장했다.  ? －
University of Pennsylvania
② 에서 의학 학위를 받았다. Reservations should be made online (www.summerville.net) 
Argyrol
③ 독일인 화학자와 함께  을 발명하였다. at least one week in advance of your visit.
Barnes Foundation
④ 미술 교육을 장려하기 위해  을 설립했다. 
⑤ 자세한 설명과 함께 소장품을 전시했다. 6 9
①  월부터  월까지 매주 일요일에 진행된다.
8
②  세 미만 아이들은 무료로 참가할 수 있다.
③  간식과 물이 제공된다.
Summerville Forest
④  에 대한 소개가 한 시간 동안 진행된다.
⑤  온라인 예약은 방문 하루 전까지 해야 한다.
Mountaintop Yodeling Contest
26. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하지 않는  것은?
Mountaintop Yodeling Contest
Show off your yodeling skills with the backdrop of the 
beautiful Alps. 28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?
Place: special outdoor stage set up at Mt. Billatus (2,545m) Though  most  bees  fill  their  days  visiting  flowers  and 
?
Time & Date: 2:00 p.m. on June 12, 2017 collecting  pollen,  some  bees  take  advantage  of  the  hard 
?
work of others. These thieving bees sneak into the nest of an 
Registration(online only): until June 1(www.yodel.net)
?
unsuspecting “normal” bee (known as the host), lay an egg 
①
Requirements 
?
near the pollen mass being gathered by the host bee for her 
- All contestants should sing a 2-minute yodel of their choice.
own offspring, and then sneak back out. When the egg of the 
- All yodels should be sung either in French or in English.
thief hatches, it kills the host’s offspring and then eats the 
Prizes
? pollen  meant  for its  victim.  Sometimes  called  brood 
②
- 1st place: a round-trip airplane ticket to London
parasites,  these  bees  are  also  referred  to  as  cuckoo  bees, 
- 2nd place: a Swiss watch 
because they are similar to cuckoo birds, which lay an egg in 
*The contest will be canceled if the weather is unfavorable. the nest of another bird and leaves it for that bird to raise. 
③
They  are  more technically  called  cleptoparasites.  Clepto 
④
Mt. Billatus means “thief” in Greek, and the term cleptoparasite refers 
①  에 설치된 특별 야외무대에서 열린다. 
specifically  to  an  organism that  lives  off  another  by 
②  등록 기한은 6월 1일까지이다. ⑤
stealing its food. In this case the cleptoparasite feeds on the 
③  프랑스어나 영어로 요들을 불러야 한다. 
host’s hard-earned pollen stores.
2 London
④  등 상품은    왕복 항공권이다. 
⑤  날씨가 좋지 않으면 취소된다. *brood parasite: (알을 대신 기르도록 하는) 탁란 동물
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
(A) (B) (C)
29. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은?  [3점] 31. Interest in extremely long periods of time sets geology and 
Some  coaches  erroneously  believe  that  mental  skills  astronomy  apart  from  other  sciences.  Geologists  think  in 
training  (MST)  can  only  help  perfect  the  performance  of  terms of billions of years for the age of Earth and its oldest 
highly skilled competitors. As a result, they shy away from  rocks numbers that, like the national debt, are not easily 
―
MST,  (A) denying/rationalizing that  because  they  are  not  comprehended. Nevertheless, the  
coaching elite athletes, mental skills training is less important.  are  important  for  environmental  geologists  because  they 
It is true that mental skills become increasingly important at  provide  a  way  to  measure  human  impacts  on  the  natural 
high levels of competition. As athletes move up the competitive  world. For example, we would like to know the rate of natural 
ladder, they become more homogeneous in terms of physical  soil formation from solid rock to determine whether topsoil 
skills. In fact, at high levels of competition, all athletes have  erosion from agriculture is too great. Likewise, understanding 
the physical skills to be successful. Consequently, any small  how climate has changed over millions of years is vital to 
difference in (B) physical/mental factors can play a huge  properly assess current global warming trends. Clues to past 
role in determining performance outcomes. However, we can  environmental change are well preserved in many different 
anticipate that personal growth and performance will progress  kinds of rocks.
faster in young, developing athletes who are given mental 
time scales of geological activity
① 
skills training than in athletes not exposed to MST. In fact, the 
global patterns in species diversity 
② 
optimal time for introducing MST may be when athletes are 
regional differences in time perception
③ 
first beginning their sport. Introducing MST (C) early/later 
statistical methods for climate projections 
④ 
in athletes’ careers may lay the foundation that will help them 
criticisms of geological period classifications
develop to their full potential. ⑤ 
*homogeneous: 동질적인  **optimal: 최적의 
(A) (B) (C)
denying physical later
① …… ……
denying mental early
② …… ……
rationalizing physical early
③ …… …… 32. Politics cannot be suppressed, whichever policy process is 
rationalizing physical later
④ …… ……
employed and however sensitive and respectful of differences 
rationalizing mental early
⑤ …… ……
it might be. In other words, there is no end to politics. It is 
wrong to think that proper institutions, knowledge, methods 
of  consultation,  or  participatory  mechanisms  can  make 
disagreement go away. Theories of all sorts promote the view 
that there are ways by which disagreement can be processed 
or  managed  so  as  to  make  it  disappear.  The  assumption 
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? 
behind  those  theories  is  that  disagreement  is  wrong  and 
Medicine became big business with the expansion of new,  consensus is the desirable state of things. In fact, consensus 
higher-cost treatments and the increased numbers of health  rarely comes without some forms of subtle coercion and the 
care  providers  in  the  United  States.  As  more  health  care  absence of fear in expressing a disagreement is a source of 
providers entered the market, competition increased among  genuine  freedom.  Debates  cause  disagreements  to  evolve, 
①them. Interestingly, the increase in competition led health  often for the better, but a positively evolving debate does not 
care providers to recommend more services to the persons  have to equal a reduction in disagreement. The suppression of 
②they served. This phenomenon reflects a unique feature in  disagreement should never be made into a goal in political 
the health care industry―provider-induced demand, which  deliberation. A defense is required against any suggestion that 
allows health care providers to maintain their income even 
③ . [3점]
as competition increases. Average consumers of health care 
*consensus: 합의  **coercion: 강압
do not know how to diagnose their medical conditions and 
④
political development results from the freedom of speech
do  not  have  a  license  to  order  services  or  prescribe  ①
political disagreement is not the normal state of things
medications. So consumers rely on the knowledge of health  ②
care providers to determine what services are needed, even  ③ politics should not restrict any form of difference
though ⑤they stand to make more money by ordering more  ④ freedom could be achieved only through tolerance
services. suppression could never be a desirable tool in politics 
⑤
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. To make plans for the future, the brain must have an ability  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
to take certain elements of prior experiences and reconfigure 
Since the concept of a teddy bear is very obviously not a 
them in a way that does not copy any actual past experience or 
genetically inherited trait, we can be confident that we are 
present reality exactly. To accomplish that, the organism must 
looking at a cultural trait. However, it is a cultural trait that 
go beyond the mere ability to form internal representations, 
seems  to  be  under  the  guidance  of  another,  genuinely 
the models of the world outside. It must acquire the ability to 
biological  trait:  the  cues  that  attract  us  to  babies  (high 
We can argue that 
.  foreheads  and  small  faces). Cute,  baby-like  features  are 
①
tool-making, one of the fundamental distinguishing features of 
inherently appealing, producing a nurturing response in most 
primate cognition, depends on this ability, since a tool does 
humans. Teddy bears that had a more baby-like appearance
②
not exist in a ready-made form in the natural environment and 
however slight this may have been initially were thus 
― ―
has to be imagined in order to be made. The neural machinery 
more popular with customers. Teddy bear manufacturers 
③
for  creating  and  holding  ‘images  of  the  future’  was  a 
obviously noticed which bears were selling best and so made 
necessary prerequisite for tool-making, and thus for launching 
more  of  these  and  fewer  of  the  less  popular  models,  to 
human civilization.
[3점] maximize their profits. As a result, using animal images 
④
mirror accurate images of the world outside  for commercial purposes was faced with severe criticism from 
①
manipulate and transform these models animal rights activists. In this way, the selection pressure 
② ⑤
visualize the present reality as it is built up by the customers resulted in the evolution of a more 
③
bring the models back from memory baby-like bear by the manufacturers.
④
identify and reproduce past experiences faithfully
⑤
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
It takes time to develop and launch products. Consequently, 
many companies know 6 12 months ahead of time that 
?
they will be launching a new product. 
34. Since life began in the oceans, most life, including freshwater 
life, has a chemical composition more like the ocean than fresh 
(A) This marketing technique is called demand creation. It 
water. It appears that most freshwater life did not originate in fresh 
involves  creating  a  buzz  about  a  new  potentially 
water, but is secondarily adapted, having passed from ocean to 
revolutionary  nutrient  or  training  technique  through 
land and then back again to fresh water. As improbable as this 
publishing  articles  and/or  books  that  stimulate  the 
may seem, the bodily fluids of aquatic animals show a strong 
reader’s  interest.  Once  this  is  done,  a  new  product  is 
similarity to oceans, and indeed, most studies of ion balance in 
launched.
freshwater  physiology  document  the  complex  regulatory 
mechanisms  by  which  fish,  amphibians  and  invertebrates  (B) Over a series of issues, you begin to see more articles 
attempt to  discussing  this  new  nutrient  and  potential  to  enhance 
. 
It  is  these  sorts  of  unexpected  complexities  and  apparent  training and/or performance. Then, after 4?6 months, a 
contradictions that make ecology so interesting. The idea of a  new product is coincidentally launched that contains the 
fish in a freshwater lake struggling to accumulate salts inside  ingredient  that  has  been  discussed  in  previous  issues. 
its body to mimic the ocean reminds one of the other great  Books and supplement reviews have also been used as 
contradiction  of  the  biosphere:  plants  are  bathed  in  an  vehicles  to  promote  the  sale  of  fitness  and  nutrition 
atmosphere composed of roughly three-quarters nitrogen, yet  products.
their growth is frequently restricted by lack of nitrogen.
[3점] (C) In order to create interest in the product, companies will 
*amphibian: 양서류  **invertebrate: 무척추동물 often  launch  pre-market  advertising  campaigns.  In  the 
nutrition industry, articles are often written discussing a 
maintain an inner ocean in spite of surrounding fresh water
①
new nutrient under investigation.
attain ion balance by removing salts from inside their body
②
return to the ocean to escape from their natural enemies (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ ①  － － ②  － －
rebuild their external environment to obtain resources (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ ③  － － ④  － －
change their physiology in accord with their surroundings (C) (B) (A)
⑤ ⑤  － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.
There’s a direct counterpart to pop music in the classical  Human beings discovered this art thousands of years ago, and 
song, more commonly called an “art song,” which does  they have invented several devices to make it easier and faster.
not focus on the development of melodic material. 
In fiber processing the word ‘spinning’ means two quite 
different  things. ( ) One  is  the  formation  of  individual 
(A) But the pop song will rarely be sung and played exactly  ①
fibers by squeezing a liquid through one or more small openings 
as written; the singer is apt to embellish that vocal line to 
in a nozzle called a spinneret and letting it harden. ( ) Spiders 
②
give it a “styling,” just as the accompanist will fill out the 
and silkworms have been spinning fibers in this way for millions 
piano part to make it more interesting and personal. The  of years, but chemists and engineers learned the procedure from 
performers might change the original tempo and mood  them only about a century ago. ( ) In the other kind of 
③
completely.  spinning sometimes called throwing to prevent confusion 
―
with the first kind two or more fibers are twisted together to 
―
(B) Both  the  pop  song  and  the  art  song  tend  to  follow 
form  a  thread. ( ) The  ancient  distaff  and  spindle  are 
④
tried-and-true  structural  patterns.  And  both  will  be  examples that were replaced by the spinning wheel in the Middle 
published  in  the  same  way with  a  vocal  line  and  a  Ages. ( ) Later came the spinning jenny, the water frame, 
― ⑤
basic piano part written out underneath. and  Crompton’s  mule spinning  machines  that  became 
―
symbols of the Industrial Revolution.
[3점]
(C) You won’t find such extremes of approach by the performers 
of songs by Franz Schubert or Richard Strauss. These will  *distaff and spindle: 실을 감는 막대와 추
be performed note for note because both the vocal and 
(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  , 
piano parts have been painstakingly written down by the 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
composer with an ear for how each relates to the other.
[3점]
When considered in terms of evolutionary success, many 
*embellish:  꾸미다  **tried-and-true: 유효성이 증명된 of the seemingly irrational choices that people make do not 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) seem  so  foolish  after  all.  Most  animals,  including  our 
①  － － ②  － －
ancestors and modern-day capuchin monkeys, lived very 
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  － － ④  － －
close to the margin of survival. Paleontologists who study 
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  － －
early human civilizations have uncovered evidence that our 
ancestors faced frequent periods of drought and freezing. 
When you are living on the verge of starvation, a slight 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
downturn in your food reserves makes a lot more difference 
적절한 곳을 고르시오. 
than a slight upturn. Anthropologists who study people still 
38. living in hunter-gatherer societies have discovered that they 
regularly make choices designed to produce not the best 
The  net  effect  of  this  was  that,  although  customers 
opportunity for obtaining a hyperabundant supply of food but, 
benefited, the banks lost out as their costs increased but  instead, the least danger of ending up with an insufficient 
the total number of customers stayed the same. supply. In other words, people everywhere have a strong 
motivation to avoid falling below the level that will feed 
In  mature  markets,  breakthroughs  that  lead  to  a  major  themselves  and  their  families.  If  our  ancestors  hadn’t 
change  in  competitive  positions  and  to  the  growth  of  the  agonized over losses and instead had taken too many chances 
in going after the big gains, they’d have been more likely to 
market are rare. ( ) Because of this, competition becomes 
①
lose out and never become anyone’s ancestor.
a zero sum game in which one organization can only win at 
the expense of others. ( ) However, where the degree of  ??*agonize: 괴로워하다, 고민하다
②
competition  is  particularly  intense  a  zero  sum  game  can 
quickly become a negative sum game, in that everyone in the  Our  ancestors  gave  priority  to (A) minimum 
market is faced with additional costs. ( ) As an example  resources rather than pursuing maximum gains, and that 
③
was  the  rational  choice  for  human (B)   from  an 
of this, when one of the major high street banks in Britain 
evolutionary perspective. 
tried to gain a competitive advantage by opening on Saturday 
mornings, it attracted a number of new customers who found 
(A) (B)
the traditional Monday-Friday bank opening hours to be a 
securing freedom
① ……
constraint. ( ) However, faced with a loss of customers, 
④ sharing interaction
② ……
the  competition  responded  by  opening  on  Saturdays  as 
identifying exploration
③ ……
well. ( ) In  essence,  this  proved  to  be  a  negative  sum 
⑤ sharing prosperity
④ ……
game. 
securing survival
⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
It was the day of the final match. That morning Andrew had 
According  to  many  sociologists,  the  study  of  what  our 
received a call from the nursing home informing him that 
society calls ‘art’ can only really progress if we drop the 
Grandad’s condition had become serious. The news played 
highly specific and ideologically loaded terminology of ‘art’, 
upon Andrew’s mind as (b)he started to play. After several 
‘artworks’  and  ‘artists’,  and  replace  these  with  the  more 
fierce battles, Andrew’s concentration wavered for a moment. 
neutral and less historically specific terms ‘cultural forms’, 
His mind travelled to his grandad, who was in another battle 
‘cultural products’ and ‘cultural producers’. These cultural 
for his life. It was then that Andrew made a big mistake! The 
products be they paintings, sculptures, forms of music or 
―
mistake was a fatal one, and it was all over. (c)He had lost.
whatever should  be  regarded  as  being  made  by  certain 
―
types of cultural producer, and as being used by particular 
(C)
groups  of  people  in  particular  ways  in  specific  social 
Andrew arrived at the nursing home in a gloomy mood, but 
contexts. By using the more neutral term ‘cultural products’ 
he was blessed with good news. His grandad was recovering. 
for particular objects, and ‘cultural producers’ for the people 
Andrew was greatly delighted, but (d)he could not help being 
who make those objects, the sociologist seeks to break with a 
disappointed in a corner of his mind. “I tried my best to fulfill 
view  that  she/he  sees  as  having  dominated  the  study  of 
your  dream  but  I  couldn’t  make  it,”  Andrew  said  in 
cultural  forms  for  too  long,  namely  trying  to  understand 
disappointment. “That’s all right,” said Grandad. “The real 
everything in terms of the category ‘art’. This is a category 
lesson of chess is learning how to tame your mind. See, my 
that is too limited and context-specific to encompass all the 
mind has won the battle over my body. I will recover soon and 
different cultural products that people in different societies 
see you become champion one day in perfect health.” Andrew 
make and use. It is a term that is also too loaded to take at face 
was relieved and smiled with joy.
value and to use naively in study of our own society. Since it 
is in the interests of certain social groups to define some 
(D)
things as ‘art’ and others as not, the very term ‘art’ itself 
When Andrew reached the nursing home, Grandad was 
cannot be uncritically used by the sociologist who wishes to 
sitting up in bed. “You won the semi-final?” (e)he asked, 
understand  how  and  why  such  labelling  processes  occur. 
offering up a weak smile. Andrew nodded his head. Indeed, 
Quite simply, then, in order to study cultural matters, many 
Andrew’s grandad was his chess master. As a kid, Andrew 
sociologists believe one has to   the terms ‘art’, 
liked to observe Grandad play chess and often predicted his 
‘artwork’ and ‘artist’ as the basis for our analysis. Instead, 
moves even before he began to move the pieces. “Andrew,” 
these terms become important objects of analysis themselves.
said Grandad, inspired by his grandson’s superb victory, “you 
are now all set to fulfill my dream. Tomorrow you will surely 
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
win the National Chess Championship.”
Art: A Means to Overcome a Cultural Gap
①
Interpreting Culture In and Out of Context
② (A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Different Forms of Art in the World of Culture
③
가장 적절한 것은?
Cultural Diversity: Cornerstones of Civilizations
④
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
Culture as a Basis of Understanding the Concept of Art ①  － － ②  － －
⑤
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③  － － ④  － －
(D) (C) (B)
⑤  － －
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
reject borrow introduce
①  ②  ③  44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e)  중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
stress revive
④  ⑤ 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Andrew
45. 윗글의  에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
(A)
2016 National Chess Championship
①   우승자에게 승리를 거두었다.
Andrew  steadied  his  eyes  upon  the  black  and  white 
② 할아버지의 병세에 관한 전화를 받고 결승전에서 큰 실수를 했다.
squares. He thought awhile before pushing his knight to an 
③ 결승전에서 패배한 사실을 할아버지에게 알리지 않았다. 
unbeatable position. Now Andrew was sure he had beaten 
④ 할아버지로부터 체스가 주는 교훈에  관하여 들었다. 
Timothy Tandon, the winner of the 2016 National Chess  ⑤ 어렸을 때 할아버지의 체스 게임을 즐겨 봤다.
Championship. Andrew, whom nobody had noticed before 
the tournament this year, came to progress to the final match.  *  확인 사항
After enjoying this memorable victory, Andrew headed straight 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
to the nursing home where (a)his sick grandad was staying.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 예비 시행 문제지
제 3 교시
짝수형
5. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터 22번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 20
고르시오.
번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 들
① 자전거 통근을 권장하려고 ② 교통 체증 상황을 안내하려고
려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다.
③ 환경 단체 지원을 호소하려고 ④ 시장 선거 출마를 선언하려고
⑤ 자동차 함께 타기를 제안하려고
1. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 6. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 주장으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sorry, I don’t like soccer.
①  ①  지하철에서 떠들지 말자. ②  지하철 노약자석을 비워두자.
I’d rather go there by bus.
②  ③  지하철 좌석을 재배치하자. ④  지하철 표지판을 변경하자.
③  It’ll take about 30 minutes. ⑤  지하철을 탈 때 줄을 서자.
Take number 22 heading south.
④ 
Taking the subway isn’t a good idea. 7. 다음을  듣고,  여자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 
⑤ 
고르시오.
①  양파 섭취가 건강에 미치는 영향
2. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
②  눈물을 구성하고 있는 성분
적절한 것을 고르시오.
③  눈병을 예방하는 방법
Yes. I got here first. ④  양파로 만든 요리의 종류
① 
No problem. Here you are. ⑤  양파를 썰 때 눈물이 나는 이유
② 
Sure. I’ll return the book soon.
③ 
Okay. You may go to the library. 8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
④ 
Alright. I’ll give you my password. 고르시오.  [3점]
⑤ 
①  타문화 이해의 중요성
②  인도 전통 문화의 우수성
3. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  ③  고객 만족도를 향상시키는 방법
적절한 것을 고르시오. ④  친밀도에 따른 악수 방법의 차이
I was at home yesterday. ⑤  왼손을 쓰는 사람들에 대한 편견
① 
It’s rainy outside now.
② 
It was very rewarding. 9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
③ 
It’s time to have a break. photographer   fashion model
④  ①  -
Let’s figure it out together. advertiser   copywriter
⑤  ②  -
customer   salesclerk
③  -
editor   news reporter
④  -
Archmond’s
4. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서  의 위치를 고르시오. movie director   movie actress
⑤  -
10. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
고르시오.
1
82
영어 영역(A 형) 짝수형
11. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을  18. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
고르시오. 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:   
①  계단 청소하기 ②  근무시간 바꿔 주기
③  대회 참가 신청하기 ④  연주회에 함께 가기
I’ll arrange that for you immediately.
① 
⑤  피아노 연습 중지하기
I’ll send a plumber as soon as possible.
② 
We’ll place fresh towels in your bathroom.
③ 
12. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을  Open the window to refresh the air, please.
④ 
고르시오. Our staff will fix the window after you leave.
⑤ 
①  추가요금 알려주기 ②  계산서 미리 가져다주기    
③  예약 좌석 바꿔주기 ④  프랑스 요리 추천해주기 19. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
⑤  주문 사항 일부 변경하기 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
Man: 
     
13. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 언급한 휴대전화의 문제점을 고르시오.
No problem. Let’s see a movie. 
① 
①  버튼 오작동 ②  배터리 불량 I agree. New York is a big city.
② 
③  안테나 고장 ④  액정 화면 파손 Hurry up. We’re behind schedule.
③ 
⑤  통화 끊김 현상 Don’t worry. Your brother will be alright.
④ 
It’s okay. Let’s have dinner some other time.
⑤ 
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 늦게 귀가하는 이유를 고르시오.
Susan Chris
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이  에게 할 말로 가장 
①  빙판길 때문에
적절한 것을 고르시오.
②  시험공부 때문에
③  과제물 재작성 때문에 Susan: Chris,     
④  컴퓨터실 청소 때문에
I want you to study with me.
① 
⑤  저녁 식사 약속 때문에
I’d better go to the school library.
② 
I found your report on top of the copy machine.
③ 
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
I’ll tell you about our homework tomorrow.
④ 
①  $10 ②  $27 ③  $30 ④  $45 ⑤  $50 ⑤  I should have prepared my report earlier.
Maple High School’s Group Presentation Contest
16. 에 관한 
다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.  [3점]
①  내용은 한국 문화에 관한 것이어야 한다. 
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. 
20
②  발표는  분을 초과해서는 안 된다.
③  파일 제출 마감은 다음 주 월요일이다. 21. 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
④  다섯 팀만 결선에 진출한다. 
①  대피 훈련을 설명하려고
⑤  심사는 학생위원회가 한다.
②  소방 시설 점검을 공지하려고
③  건물 안전 진단 결과를 알리려고
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택한 여행지를  ④  행사 일정 변경을 통보하려고 
고르시오. ⑤  보수 공사를 안내하려고
 
22. 다음 중 사용 가능한 장소로 언급된 것은?
①  식당 ②  도서관 ③  승강기
④  화장실 ⑤  주 출입구
①
②
③
④
  이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지
⑤
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
2
83
짝수형 영어 영역(A 형)
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 
One  of  the  rules  for  success  is  that  it  doesn’t  matter  There  are  many  reasons  why  people  don’t  buy  your 
where  you’re  coming  from;  all  that  matters  is  where  product most of which have nothing to do with you. It 
―
you’re  going.  Almost  everyone  has  the  uneasy  feeling  may  be  that  a  potential  customer  didn’t  need  your 
that they have wasted a good deal of their time and their 
product.  Perhaps  he  couldn’t  afford  it.  The  point  is,  you 
potential  in  the  past.  Unfortunately,  many  people  use 
must not feel personally rejected. I’ve had doors slammed 
these  feelings  of  regret  as  brakes  that  they  set  on  their 
in  my  face.  It  wasn’t  me  the  customers  were  rejecting. 
own  lives.  Instead  of  rededicating  themselves  to  the 
They  were  rejecting  my  product.  I  believe  the  biggest 
exciting  months  and  years  ahead,  they  allow  themselves 
reason  why  so  many  salespeople  fail  is  because  they 
to  be  overwhelmed  with  the  mistakes  that  they  made  in 
can’t separate themselves from their product. Whether you 
the  past.  Don’t  let  this  happen  to  you.  Instead,  think 
sell  anything,  a  potential  customer  usually  has  no  reason 
about  the  future  and  where  you  are  going.  Think  about 
to  dislike  you  personally.  Even  if  he  does,  it’s  no  big 
what  you  can  do  to  create  the  kind  of  future  you 
deal. You’ll get over it.
imagine  for  yourself.  Your  resolve  to  be  future-oriented 
will  give  you  energy  and  enthusiasm.  And  your  future  is 
① 고객을 진심으로 대하는 것이 최선의 판매 전략이다.
limited only by your imagination.
② 자신과 물건이 하나라는 마음으로 판매에 임해야 한다.
③ 효율적인 상품 진열이 판매를 촉진하는 최상의 방법이다.
①  상상력을 억압하지 마라. 
④ 고객의 구매 거절을 자신에 대한 거절로 여겨서는 안 된다.
②  잠재력을 최대한 활용하라.
⑤ 고객의 불만 사항은 사소한 것이라도 소홀히 해서는 안 된다.
③  실현 가능한 목표를 뚜렷이 설정하라.
④  과거에 집착하지 말고 미래에 집중하라.
⑤  과거의 경험으로부터 일의 우선순위를 정하라.
24. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
To Whom It May Concern,
I  recently  acquired  a  Toigeur  Airways  (TA)  return 
ticket  from  Los  Angeles  to  Incheon  using  35,000 
26. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
reward  miles.  Due  to  an  unexpected  event,  I 
Every  year,  we  throw  away  more  than  125  million  cell 
suddenly  had  to  change  my  return  flight  from  a 
phones,  which  accounts  for  nearly  65,000  tons  of  toxic 
09:15  flight  to  a  later  20:45  flight.  I  contacted  the 
airline  as  soon  as  I  could  in  order  to  change  my  waste.  Most  of  them  still  work  properly,  and  even  those 
flight.  However,  I  was  told  by  a  TA  employee  that  that don’t can be recycled. In fact, there are several good 
it  was  the  airline’s  policy  not  to  allow  a  passenger  ways  to  recycle  old  cell  phones.  One  way  is  to  donate 
to  make  changes  to  a  ticket  purchased  with  reward  them  to  charity.  If  you  have  a  newer-model  phone  and 
miles.  In  the  end,  I  had  to  buy  a  new  ticket  and  I  are  looking  to  save  some  of  the  cost  of  upgrading,  you 
don’t  think  that  was  fair.  I  strongly  insist  that  your 
can  sell  it  on  an  online  auction  site.  You  can  also 
policy  be  changed  for  the  convenience  of  the 
participate  in  store  recycling  programs,  which  often  give 
customers.
you  gift  cards  in  return.  If  your  phone  is  completely 
Sincerely,  broken  and  ready  to  be  recycled,  many  electronics  stores 
and  cell-phone  companies  will  recycle  it  for  you  free  of 
James Moore
charge.
①  정보 유출 방지를 위한 업그레이드의 중요성
①  항공사 방침의 개선을 요구하려고 
②  폐휴대폰으로 인한 환경오염의 심각성
②  마일리지 적립방법을 문의하려고
③  휴대폰 결재를 통한 기부 문화의 확산
③  변경된 탑승시간을 확인하려고
④  항공사 직원 교육을 통지하려고 ④  대량 판매되는 저가 휴대폰의 문제점
⑤  출발시간 지연에 대해 항의하려고 ⑤  휴대폰을 재활용하는 다양한 방법
3
84
영어 영역(A 형) 짝수형
The  Power  of  Portraits Dolphin  Swim  Adventure
27. 에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과  28. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하는 것은? 일치하지 않는  것은?
The Power of Portraits Dolphin Swim Adventure
Jan 14th - Feb 13th Have you ever kissed a dolphin? 
Here  is  your  chance  to  get 
close  to  one  of  the  ocean’s 
most  incredible  creatures.  For 
the  low  cost  of  only  $49  per 
Submissions Are Open To Everyone!!
person  you  can  be  a  part  of 
Submission Deadline: December 19th this unforgettable adventure.
Highlights
We are happy to announce our first show of 2012: 
Kiss,  touch,  and  swim  with  these  amazing 
?
“The Power of Portraits”
marine mammals 
Snorkel  for  incredible  underwater  views  of  the 
The  submission  fee  is  $35  for  five  photographs.  ?
?
dolphins 
Additional photographs are $10 per photo. 
Boat Schedule Details
Payment  may  be  submitted  online  or  in  person  by 
?
Departure Point: Cancun Harbor 
visiting the gallery.
Departure Time: Everyday at 9:00 a.m. / 11:30 a.m.
You can submit your photographs in person or via 
? 2:00 p.m. / 4:30 p.m. 
email at submit@phg.com. Please attach information
Additional Info 
about the photographs with your submission.
Children  aged  seven  years  and  under  are  not 
?
All  submitted  photographs  are  the  property  of  the 
? allowed to participate.
gallery and will not be returned. Actual time spent with the dolphins is about forty 
?
minutes.
Groups of eight or more participants will receive 
PHOTOHAUS GALLERY ?
a 10% discount.
24 East 7th Avenue, Boston
Terms and Conditions 
No  refunds  will  be  given  if  you  cancel  within 
2 13
①  작품 제출 마감일은  월  일이다.     
seven days of your scheduled departure.
②  다섯 편의 작품만 제출할 수 있다.
③  비용은 온라인으로 결제할 수 없다.   
④  직접 방문하여 작품을 제출할 수 있다.
①  돌고래와 함께 수영을 할 수 있다.
⑤  제출된 작품은 전시 후에 돌려준다.
②  배는 하루에 네 차례 출발한다.
③  참가 연령에 제한이 없다. 
40
④  돌고래와 보내는 실제 시간은  분 정도이다.   
⑤  여덟 명 이상의 단체인 경우 할인을 받는다.
4
85
짝수형 영어 영역(A 형)
29. 졸업식에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 30. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Congratulations  on  achieving  your  academic 
goals!  We’re  proud  of  you!  Now  it  is  time  to 
prepare for your graduation ceremony and for 
celebrating your achievements.
Preparing  for  the  Ceremony
There  is  no  rehearsal  for  the  graduation 
? The  above  graph  shows  the  differences  in  CO  
2
ceremony.
emissions  from  fuel  combustion  measured  by  ton  for 
There  is  no  limit  to  the  number  of  guests  Canada,  France,  Italy,  Mexico,  and  Turkey  in  2002  and 
?
you may invite to attend. 2008.  CO  emissions from fuel combustion for Canada, 
① 2
Mexico,  and  Turkey  were  greater  in  2008  than  in  2002. 
We suggest you wear comfortable shoes.
?
Canada  showed  the  highest  amount  of  CO   emissions 
We suggest you leave your personal belongings ② 2
?
among  all  five  countries  in  both  2002  and  2008.  Italy 
③
with your guests as there is no place to keep
was the second largest emitter, accounting for 435 million 
them during the ceremony.
tons  in  both  2002  and  2008.  France  emitted  less  CO  
④ 2
All  participants  are  required  to  wear  a  black 
? than  Mexico  in  2002,  but  this  was  reversed  in  2008. 
graduation cap and gown.  Turkey  displayed  the  biggest  increase  from  192  million 
⑤
There  will  be  no  separate  dressing  rooms  for  tons in 2002 to 264 million tons in 2008. 
?
graduates. 
*combustion: 
연소
Note
Don’t miss out on getting your free graduation 
(A), (B), (C)
31. 의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 
gift provided by the Student Government Association
적절한 것은?  [3점]
immediately following the ceremony.
It’s  impossible  to  know  for  sure  if  cats  dream  just  like 
we  do.  However,  if  you’ve  ever  watched  your  cat  when 
she’s  fast  asleep,  you  will  know  that  sometimes  her 
whiskers,  her  paws,  or  even  her  tail  might  move 
①  예행 연습은 하지 않는다. suddenly  as  if  she’s  dreaming.  Cats  can  even  be  heard 
②  초대 손님의 수는 제한이 없다. growling or purring while asleep (A) occasional/occasionally , 
③  소지품을 따로 보관할 장소가 없다.  so  perhaps  they  go  out  hunting  or  chasing  mice  in  their 
④  졸업생을 위한 별도의 탈의실이 있다. dreams!  Cats  can  sleep  for  many  hours  of  the  day.  In 
⑤  졸업식 직후에 졸업 선물을 받을 수 있다. fact,  the  average  cat  naps  for  13-18  hours  every  day 
(B) saving/to save   energy  and  pass  the  time.  Cats  in 
the  wild  are  most  active  in  the  early  morning  and 
evenings, (C) which/when  they do most of their hunting. 
Domestic  cats  adjust  to  our  routines.  After  all,  it’s  more 
fun to be awake when we are, and to sleep at night.
(A) (B) (C)
occasional saving which
① …… ……
occasional to save when
② …… ……
occasionally saving when
③ …… ……
occasionally to save which
④ …… ……
occasionally to save when
⑤ …… ……
5
86
영어 영역(A 형) 짝수형
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지  35. Rejecting a new idea is a normal reaction. Unfortunately, 
by  doing  so,  you  not  only  close  off  that  avenue  for 
않은  것은?  [3점]
exploration,  but  also  step  on  the  other  persons  ego. 
A  great  belt  of  desert  stretches  nearly  halfway  around  ’
Nobody  enjoys  having  their  ideas  squashed,  so  this 
the  world.  Starting  in  North  India,  it  passes  west  through 
Pakistan  and  Afghanistan,  continues  through  the  Near  person is likely to react defensively. You risk getting into 
①
East,  crosses  Africa  as  the  Sahara,  and  leaping  the  a  sort  of  ‘idea-killing’  argument.  To  stop  this  from 
Atlantic,  ends  in  Mexico  and  the  Southwest  United  happening,  you  need  to  take  a  deep  breath  and           
States.  In  and  near  this  and  similar  zones,  perhaps  one                             .  If  someone  offers  an  idea 
quarter  of  the  world’s  population  lives  in  buildings  to  which  you  feel  hostile,  build  on  it  by  deliberately 
constructed  of  sun-dried  mud.  The  desert  is  both  harsh  looking  for  three  good  things  that  you  can  say  about  it, 
②
and  generous.  The  intense  heat,  cold,  and  scarcity  of  before  you  allow  yourself  to  say  anything  negative.  If 
water  in  this  environment  are  well  known;  but  the  desert  your  supporting comments outweigh the critical ones, the 
also provides  insufficient means with which people can  other  person  will  feel  reassured  that  you’re  considering 
③
shelter  themselves  against  these  extremes.  For  thousands  their  idea  and  is  likely  to  be  more  receptive  to  what  you 
of  years,  earth  has  been  used  as  building  material  in 
④ say. 
the  desert  and  dry  savannah.  Mud  architecture  is  highly 
look on the positive side
resistant  to  temperature  change  and  insulates  against  ① 
⑤
satisfy the group’s needs
the day’s heat and the night’s cold. ② 
keep changing your pace
*insulate: ③ 
차단하다
make up your future plans
④ 
discover your weakest points
⑤ 
‘I’
33. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The music came to an end and the final dancers on the 
floor  whirled  to  a  stop.  I  nervously  watched  as  the 
judges  bent  their  heads  together  and  began  to  whisper. 
After  ten  long  minutes,  the  MC  walked  up  to  the  stage 
and  spoke  into  the  microphone.  “We  will  now  announce 
the winner for this year’s National Dance Championships!” 
As  one  of  the  judges  handed  him  an  envelope,  my  heart 
began to beat faster and my palms began to sweat. I was 
on the edge of my seat. It seemed like an eternity before 
36. During  the  hundreds  of  millions  of  years  that  plants 
he managed to open the envelope and read the name. 
have  been  living  on  our  planet,  they  have  become 
content anxious envious amazingly  self-sufficient.  In  addition  to  establishing  a 
①  ②  ③ 
delighted depressed useful  relationship  with  the  sun,  plants  have  learned  
④  ⑤ 
.  When  plants  die,  they  seem 
       
to  just  fall  on  the  ground  and  rot,  getting  eaten  by  many 
[34～36] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 
bugs  and  worms.  However,  researchers  were  shocked  to 
고르시오.
discover  that  dead  plants  get  consumed  only  by  particular 
34. A  good  place  for  business  leaders  to  start  the  process  bacteria  and  fungi.  Plants  know  how  to  attract  to  their 
of  building  trust  is  by  becoming  more                        to  own  rotting  only  those  microorganisms  and  earthworms 
their  employees.  Getting  out  of  the  office  and  mixing  that  will  produce  beneficial  minerals  for  the  soil  where 
with  employees  is  a  simple  solution  to  a  very  common  the  plants’  siblings  will  grow.  One  way  plants  attract 
trust  problem.  In  organizational  improvement  workshops, 
particular  microorganisms  into  their  soil  is  by 
we  often  ask,  “What  is  the  single  greatest  barrier  to 
concentrating  more  sugars  in  their  roots.  Thus  roots  such 
improving communication and trust between you and your 
as  carrots  and  potatoes  are  always  much  sweeter  than  the 
manager?”  In  many  cases,  the  first  response  is,  “I  never 
rest  of  the  plant.  Apparently,  the  quality  of  the  soil  is 
see  her.  Shes  always  in  a  meeting.”  The  employees 
’ critically  important,  not  only  as  a  source  of  water  and 
cannot  develop  a  perception  of  trust  with  higher-ups 
minerals for plants but for their very survival.
  [3점]
when  some  dont  even  know  what  they  look  like.  If 
’
to grow their own soil 
leaders  seldom  come  out  of  the  office,  choosing  to  ① 
communicate  through  email  instead,  they  are  no  longer  a  ②  to extend their lifespan
part of that organization. to consume microorganisms
  [3점] ③ 
to survive attacks of bacteria 
frank similar visible ④ 
①  ②  ③ 
④  grateful ⑤  subjective ⑤  to keep the environment clean
6
87
짝수형 영어 영역(A 형)
(A) (B)
37. 다음 글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 
More  and  more  today,  English  is  used  by  Korean  곳은?  [3점]
professionals  on  business  in  Brazil,  by  Polish  hotel  staff 
But  they  ran  out  of  the  special  offers  so  you  have  to 
welcoming  tourists  from  around  the  world,  or  by  Indian  
buy another of the meals at full price. 
workers who have taken up jobs in the Gulf States. When 
On  the  way  home  from  work  you  see  an  excellent 
the  role  of  a  language  is  to  be  a  tool  for  communication 
bargain:  a  really  good  ready  meal  at  25  percent  of  the 
between  non-native  speakers,  we  cannot  rationally  call  it  a 
usual cost. (   ) You snap up one but when you get home 
‘foreign’  language.  Who  is  the  foreigner,  (A) ,  ①
you feel like having a friend around. (   ) You phone, she 
when  a  speaker  from  Chile  interacts  with  a  colleague  ②
agrees,  so  you  pop  out  for  another  bargain.  ( )  The 
from  Kazakhstan,  using  English?  In  a  situation  like  this,  ③
worst  is  to  come:  you  heat  up  both  meals  and  then  your 
the  concept  of  ‘foreigner’  and  of  ‘foreign  language’  is 
friend phones to say something has come up and she can’t 
not applicable. Instead, we have a situation where English 
make it. (   ) You have two hot, unreheatable meals: you 
is acting as a lingua franca.  (B) , it is acting  ④
have  to  throw  one  away.  (    )  Despite  the  fact  that  the 
as  the  common  language  for  speakers  whose  mother  ⑤
meals  are  identical,  economists  say,  people  nearly  always 
tongues are different.
eat the one for which they paid full price. 
(A) (B)
in addition By contrast
① ……
by contrast As a result
② ……
therefore Nevertheless
③ ……
however In conclusion
④ ……
for example That is to say
⑤ ……
40. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? 
You’ll need flour, eggs, milk, and oil to make pancakes. 
Have  your  toppings  ready  as  you’ll  want  to  eat  the 
38. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
pancakes as soon as they’re done. Follow the instructions 
Did  you  know  that  one  of  the  most  common  fears 
below.
students  have  is  the  fear  of  public  speaking?  I  have 
①
(A)  When  the  edges  turn  brown,  turn  it  over  and  cook 
heard  a  number  of  people  say  that  they  once  failed  a 
the  other  side.  Remove  it  from  the  pan.  Enjoy  your 
class  because  they  refused  to  give  a  speech.  That  fear 
②
pancakes with toppings such as syrup or berries. 
was  based  on  how  they  felt  others  would  judge  them  or 
(B)  Put  the  flour  in  the  mixing  bowl.  Beat  the  egg  and 
their  presentation.  Those  who  have  a  fear  of  public 
③
mix  it  into  the  milk  and  pour  that  into  the  bowl, 
speaking  often  tell  themselves  that  people  in  the  crowd 
too. Mix everything together until it thickens.
will  silently  think  bad  things  about  them.  If  they  want 
④
(C) This mixture of flour, eggs, and milk is called batter. 
to  be  more  relaxed  during  social  activities,  they  need  to 
Heat  some  oil  in  a  frying  pan  and  pour  in  some  of 
interact  with  others  in  a  positive  way.  The  truth  is, 
⑤
the batter. Cook it for a couple of minutes. 
however, some people in the audience aren’t even listening   
to  the  presentation  because  they  are  thinking  about  their  (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  - - ②  - -
anxiety  over  their  own  presentations  or  something  else  (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  - - ④  - -
altogether.   (C) (B) (A)
⑤  - -
7
88
영어 영역(A 형) 짝수형
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
As  a  result  of  the  lucky  accident,  fame  and  fortune 
When  people  first  learn  how  to  juggle,  the  universal 
have  entered  the  lives  of  both  students.  (b)They  were 
approach  they  take  is  to  devote  all  their  attention  and 
recognized  by  the  school  board.  The  media  picked  up 
effort  at  catching  the  balls.  Extraordinary  efforts  are 
on  the  story.  Even  potential  investors  started  to  call. 
justified  to  catch  the  balls,  because  after  all,  if  a  ball 
They  visited  the  boys  and  each  asked  (c)them  to  sign 
hits  the  ground,  you’ve  failed.  The  beginner  expects  that 
exclusive  contracts.  “I  can’t  believe  this  is  happening  to 
with  enough  practice,  he’ll  get  really  good  at  catching 
us!” Brian said while smiling at Mike. 
balls.  It’s  the  same  at  the  office.  Lots  of  people  try  to 
juggle  their  work  the  same  way  they  try  to  juggle  balls. 
(C)
They  rush  this  way  and  that,  dealing  with  emergencies, 
It wasn’t until months later that the potential importance 
handling  multiple  projects  at  the  same  time,  and  never 
of the discovery was fully understood. It was when Mrs. 
letting anything fall through the cracks. 
Wilson  showed  the  creation  to  her  former  chemistry 
But  it  turns  out  that  juggling  is  about  throwing,  not 
professors.  They  became  excited  and  exclaimed,  “Nobody 
catching.  The  way  to  learn  how  to  juggle  is  not  to 
has  come  up  with  something  like  this  before!”  (d)Their 
focus  obsessively  on  not  dropping  a  ball.  No,  the  way 
realization  led  to  a  discussion  of  how  it  could  be  used 
to  get  good  at  juggling  is  to  focus  on  your  throws 
as an edible plastic for improvements in traditional capsules 
instead.  If  you  are  good  at  throwing,  the  catching  will 
and gel caps for pills.
take care of itself. In the same manner, once you’ve got 
three  or  four  misthrown  projects  in  the  air  at  work,  no 
(D)
amount  of  rushing  around  is  going  to  keep  them  from 
crashing  to  the  ground.  Part  of  the  secret  of  becoming  The  next  day  Mrs.  Wilson  happened  to  see  that  a 
remarkable  at  the  office  is  to  learn  ‘how  to  focus  on  mysterious  material  had  remained  in  a  small  dish  in  the 
your throws.’ In other words, if your balls are well thrown,  lab.  She  had  never  seen  such  a  substance,  so  she  asked 
the                    is  effortless.  If  you  become  good  at  the boys to re-create it. (e)They tried and came up with 
‘throwing,’ you’ll find that you’re irreplaceable at the office. something  different:  it  looked  like  jelly  and  smelled  like 
fruit.  The  curious  boys  decided  to  have  a  lab  rat  eat  it 
to see if it was edible. Surprisingly, the rat was fine. 
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
Become the Best Juggler at Work
①  (A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
A Workplace with Multitasking
② 
가장 적절한 것은？
Juggling: A Universal Hobby
③ 
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
①  - - ②  - -
How to Manage Misthrown Projects
④ 
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③  - - ④  - -
Throw and Catch: The Essence of Ball Games 
⑤ 
(D) (C) (B)
⑤  - -
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? (a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? 
hitting catching practicing
①  ②  ③  (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
obsessing dropping
④  ⑤ 
Mike Brian
45. 위 글의  와  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. Mrs. Wilson
① 으로부터 화학 약품을 받았다.
(A) ② 잠재적 투자자들의 방문을 받았다.
③ 만든 것을 화학과 학생들에게 직접 보여 주었다.
One day, Mrs. Wilson challenged some of her students 
Mrs.  Wilson
④ 으로부터 신비한 물질을 다시 만들도록 요청
at  Glendale  High  School  to  make  some  glue  to  fix  a 
받았다.
broken  vase.  She  gave  Mike  and  Brian  some  chemicals 
⑤ 젤리처럼 보이는 것을 실험실 쥐에게 먹여보기로 했다.
and  told  them  to  try.  (a)They  began  mixing  and  soon 
realized  something  wasn’t  quite  right.  “Uh,  Mrs.  Wilson, 
is  this  going  to  explode?”  a  worried  Mike  asked.  It  did 
*  확인 사항
explode, and they spent the rest of the afternoon cleaning 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
up.
하시오.
8
81
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 예비 시행 문제지
제 3 교시
짝수형
6. 다음을  듣고,  여자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 
  1번부터 22번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 1번부터 20
고르시오.
번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 들
①  양파 섭취가 건강에 미치는 영향
려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다.
②  눈물을 구성하고 있는 성분
③  눈병을 예방하는 방법
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ④  양파로 만든 요리의 종류
적절한 것을 고르시오. ⑤  양파를 썰 때 눈물이 나는 이유
It was done yesterday. 
① 
I’ll receive it by email.
② 
I bought it at the post office. 7. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
③ 
I don’t know where to find it. 고르시오.
④ 
I’ll finish it by tomorrow morning.
⑤  ①  타문화 이해의 중요성
②  인도 전통 문화의 우수성
③  고객 만족도를 향상시키는 방법
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
④  친밀도에 따른 악수 방법의 차이
적절한 것을 고르시오. ⑤  왼손을 쓰는 사람들에 대한 편견
About two blocks from here.
① 
Only 10 dollars for adults.
② 
It took about an hour. 8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
③ 
④  It’s hard to become a tour guide. ①  photographer - fashion model
⑤  I stopped by the City Hall yesterday. ②  advertiser - copywriter
customer   salesclerk
③  -
editor   news reporter
④  -
3. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
movie director   movie actress
⑤  -
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sure, I got a piano on Friday.
① 
No, the jazz concert is Saturday.
② 
9. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
No, music always makes me happy. 
③ 
고르시오.
Yes, she’s my favorite movie actress.
④ 
Yes, I read five books on different musicians.
⑤ 
4. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
① 자전거 통근을 권장하려고
② 교통 체증 상황을 안내하려고
③ 환경 단체 지원을 호소하려고
④ 시장 선거 출마를 선언하려고
⑤ 자동차 함께 타기를 제안하려고
5. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
10. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
①  여권 만기일을 확인해야 한다.
고르시오.
②  보안 검색 절차를 따라야 한다. 
③  항공권은 미리 예약하는 것이 좋다. ①  계단 청소하기 ②  근무시간 바꿔 주기
④  세관 신고 물품을 확인할 필요가 있다. ③  대회 참가 신청하기 ④  연주회에 함께 가기
⑤  공항에 여유 있게 일찍 도착해야 한다. ⑤  피아노 연습 중지하기
1
82
영어 영역(B 형) 짝수형
11. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을  18. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
고르시오. 적절한 것을 고르시오.
to pick her up from work Woman:   
① 
to drive her to the gym
② 
I’ll arrange that for you immediately.
① 
to buy a bandage
③ 
I’ll send a plumber as soon as possible.
② 
to take out the garbage
④ 
We’ll place fresh towels in your bathroom.
③ 
to take her to the doctor’s office
⑤ 
Open the window to refresh the air, please.
④ 
Our staff will fix the window after you leave.
12. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 늦게 귀가하는 이유를 고르시오. ⑤ 
①  빙판길 때문에
19. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
②  시험공부 때문에
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
③  과제물 재작성 때문에
Man: 
④  컴퓨터실 청소 때문에      
⑤  저녁 식사 약속 때문에
How about searching the Internet encyclopedia?
① 
You should change the wrong information.
13. 대화를 듣고,  댐에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은  것을  ② 
Old books on the solar system are useful.
③ 
고르시오.
Are you concerned about Internet ethics?
④ 
①  저수량 ②  환경 문제
You can ask how to get to the library.
⑤ 
③  관광 수익 ④  준공 시기
⑤  전력 생산량
Susan Chris
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이  에게 할 말로 가장 
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점] 적절한 것을 고르시오.
$14 $20 $24 $26 $30 Susan: Chris,     
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
I want you to study with me.
Maple High School’s Group Presentation Contest ① 
15. 에 관한 
I’d better go to the school library.
② 
다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
I found your report on top of the copy machine.
③ 
①  내용은 한국 문화에 관한 것이어야 한다.  I’ll tell you about our homework tomorrow.
④ 
20
②  발표는  분을 초과해서는 안 된다.
I should have prepared my report earlier.
⑤ 
③  파일 제출 마감은 다음 주 월요일이다.
④  다섯 팀만 결선에 진출한다. 
⑤  심사는 학생위원회가 한다.
bonobos
16. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 
고르시오.  [3점]
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
①  콩고의 숲에 서식한다.
②  종종 서서 걷는다. 21. 남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
③  보통 혼자 사냥한다.
to advise parents on their children’s welfare
① 
④  음식을 구하는 데 도구를 이용한다.
to give tips on how to feed family pets 
② 
⑤  종종 서로 음식을 공유한다.
to promote a new children’s hospital
③ 
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  남자가 보러 갈 아파트를  ④  to warn people of an unknown disease 
to notify children of seat belt safety in cars
고르시오. ⑤ 
asthma
22. 의 원인으로 언급되지 않은  것은?
①  애완동물 ②  꽃가루
①
③  간접흡연 ④  고구마
② ⑤  오염된 실내 공기
③
④
  이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지
⑤
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
2
83
짝수형 영어 영역(B 형)
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
One  of  the  rules  for  success  is  that  it  doesn’t  matter  The  National  Park  Service  says  1,825  Burmese  pythons 
where  you’re  coming  from;  all  that  matters  is  where  have  been  caught  in  and  around  the  Florida  Everglades 
you’re  going.  Almost  everyone  has  the  uneasy  feeling  since  2000.  One  of  the  largest over  16  feet  long  and 
―
that they have wasted a good deal of their time and their  weighing  156  pounds was  caught  just  in  January.  The 
―
potential  in  the  past.  Unfortunately,  many  people  use  Burmese  pythons  have  been  joined  in  the  swamps  by 
these  feelings  of  regret  as  brakes  that  they  set  on  their  other  discarded  pets:  African  pythons  and  other  kinds  of 
own  lives.  Instead  of  rededicating  themselves  to  the  snakes.  They  are  rapidly  vacuuming  the  Everglades  clean 
exciting  months  and  years  ahead,  they  allow  themselves  of  native  wildlife.  One  python  even  tried  to  eat  a  live 
to  be  overwhelmed  with  the  mistakes  that  they  made  in  alligator.  The  National  Park  Service  says  that  in  areas 
the  past.  Don’t  let  this  happen  to  you.  Instead,  think  where  the  snakes  are  known  to  be  active,  sightings  of 
about  the  future  and  where  you  are  going.  Think  about  medium-size  mammals  have  dropped  by  as  much  as  99 
what  you  can  do  to  create  the  kind  of  future  you  percent.  It’s  not  hard  to  envision  what  happens  next. 
imagine  for  yourself.  Your  resolve  to  be  future-oriented  With  their  prey  exhausted,  the  snakes  will  begin  moving 
will  give  you  energy  and  enthusiasm.  And  your  future  is  out  of  the  Everglades  in  search  of  food pets,  for 
―
limited only by your imagination. example.  Florida  Senator  Bill  Nelson  says  that  snakes 
don’t  belong  in  the  Everglades  in  the  first  place,  “and 
①  상상력을 억압하지 마라. 
they certainly don’t belong in people’s backyards.”
②  잠재력을 최대한 활용하라.
③  실현 가능한 목표를 뚜렷이 설정하라. *python: 비단뱀
④  과거에 집착하지 말고 미래에 집중하라.
Pet Pythons in People’s Backyards in Florida
① 
⑤  과거의 경험으로부터 일의 우선순위를 정하라.
Pythons and Mammals: A Happy Get-Together
② 
Pythons in Florida: A Successful Transplantation
③ 
Florida on the Alert: The Threat of Foreign Snakes
④ 
A Battle in the Everglades: Burmese vs. African Pythons
⑤ 
24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Music  is  an  art  that  depends  on  re-creation.  When  you 
look  at  a  painting,  a  piece  of  sculpture,  or  a  building, 
you  experience  exactly  what  the  artist  created  without 
involving  an  intervening  person.  Not  so  with  music. 
Someone must bring it to life; it requires an intermediary. 
she[her]
A  few  compositions  exist  only  on  discs  or  tape,  and  in  26. 밑줄 친  가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? 
such  cases  there  is  no  performing  intermediary.  In  some  Sarah kept walking until a combination of curiosity and 
types  of  music,  such  as  jazz,  the  performer  is  the  creator  hunger  drove  her  into  an  old  convenience  store. 
①
of  the  music  because,  to  a  degree,  it  is  made  up  as  the  Pushing  open  its  glass  door,  she  was  sucked  once 
②
performer  goes  along.  However,  in  most  cases  even  again  into  that  other,  earlier  time.  The  storekeeper,  the 
composers  can’t  remember  or  express  their  own  music  only  other  occupant  of  the  place,  was  a  wrinkled  old 
completely.  They  can’t  play  several  instruments  at  once,  woman  in  a  faded  lavender-print  dress.  She  didn’t  bother 
and  they  can’t  perform  their  music  if  they  are  not  greeting  Sarah  but  continued  to  sit  motionless,  conserving 
physically present. So other performers are needed.  her  energy  as  she  watched  a  collection  of  counter 
③
goods  that  might  have  sprung  straight  out  of  Sarah’s 
*intermediary: 
중개자
childhood. A price list stuck up crooked beside the candy 
Music is brought to life by performers.
①  told  her  she  could  buy  half  a  loaf  of  oversweetened 
④
②  Listeners’ appreciation completes music. white  bread,  if  she  wanted,  or  a  scoop  of  frozen  peas. 
③  Composers are the genuine creators of music. There  was  nothing  here  that  Sarah  felt  like  eating.  She 
Composers rarely create music out of nothing. nodded  at  the  woman,  who  once  again  failed  to 
④ 
Music depends on the audience for interpretation. acknowledge  her, and left the shop.
⑤  ⑤
3
84
영어 영역(B 형) 짝수형
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점] 29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 
“Aerobic”  means  “with  oxygen.”  It’s  not  surprising  that 
the  demands  you  make  on  your body when you ask it to 
sustain  an  aerobic  activity  train  your  lungs  to  deliver 
oxygen and your heart  to pump out greater amounts of 
①
blood  to  carry  that  oxygen  to  your  working  muscles. 
Your  body  also  responds  to  this  challenge  by  producing 
and  storing  something  referred  to  as  aerobic  enzymes. 
②
These  enzymes  help  you  burn  more  fat,  which  is  another 
reason  why  aerobic  exercise  has  such  a  pronounced 
③
effect  on  your  body  fat.  This  effect,  which  is  often 
overlooked, is a primary reason why people  do aerobic 
④
exercises  establish  a  new  metabolism  and  a  leaner  body. 
Yet  another  benefit  of  aerobic  training  is  that  it  The  graph  shows  the  living  species  index  from  1970  to 
⑤
enables  your  muscles  to  better  use  oxygen  to  perform  2000,  which  indicates  trends  in  the  world’s  biodiversity 
work over extended periods of time.  populations  of  species  living  in  land,  freshwater,  and 
marine  ecosystems.  Compared  to  1970,  all  the  indexes 
①
fell  by  30  to  50  percent  in  2000.  Between  1975  and 
②
1980,  while  the  marine  species  index  declined,  the 
freshwater species index increased.  In 1985 the freshwater 
③
species  index  was  the  highest,  followed  by  the  land 
species index and the marine species index.  The freshwater 
④
species  index  decreased  the  least  compared  to  the  other 
indexes  between  1990  and  1995.  The  marine  species 
⑤
index,  the  highest  among  the  three  in  2000,  indicated  an 
increase between 1999 and 2000.
Thistlegorm
30. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Packed  full  of  artifacts  and  lying  in  the  clear  waters  of 
the  Red  Sea,  the  Thistlegorm  is  perhaps  the  most  famous 
of  all  shipwrecks  for  divers.  Her  fame  comes  at  a  price, 
however,  with  great  numbers  of  divers  crawling  through 
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
the structure every day. The Thistlegorm first came to the 
않은  것은?
attention  of  the  global  diving  community  in  the  1950s, 
A  great  belt  of  desert  stretches  nearly  halfway  around 
when  she  was  discovered  and  filmed  by  Jacques  Cousteau. 
the  world.  Starting  in  North  India,  it  passes  west  through 
Her  location  remained  a  secret  until  1992,  when  she  was 
Pakistan  and  Afghanistan,  continues  through  the  Near 
① rediscovered  by  recreational  divers,  and  she  has  since 
East,  crosses  Africa  as  the  Sahara,  and  leaping  the 
become  the  most  popular  diving  wreck  in  the  entire  Red 
Atlantic,  ends  in  Mexico  and  the  Southwest  United 
Sea. The Thistlegorm was a World War II armed merchant 
States.  In  and  near  this  and  similar  zones,  perhaps  one 
vessel, 126m in length, carrying supplies to the British 8th 
quarter  of  the  world’s  population  lives  in  buildings 
Army  in  North  Africa.  Packed  with  machinery  and 
constructed  of  sun-dried  mud.  The  desert  is  both  harsh 
② weapons,  she  was  spotted  in  the  northern  Red  Sea  by  a 
and  generous.  The  intense  heat,  cold,  and  scarcity  of  German  bomber  on  the  6th  October  1941.  Two  bombs 
water  in  this  environment  are  well  known;  but  the  desert  entered  her  Number  Four  hold,  causing  a  huge  explosion 
also provides  insufficient means with which people can  that  cut  her  in  half;  she  sank  immediately  with  the  loss 
③
shelter  themselves  against  these  extremes.  For  thousands  of nine souls.
of  years,  earth  has  been  used  as  building  material  in 
④ Red Sea
①  에 있다.
the  desert  and  dry  savannah.  Mud  architecture  is  highly 
Jacques Cousteau
②  에 의해 촬영되었다. 
resistant  to  temperature  change  and  insulates  against 
⑤
③  보급품을 수송하는 독일군 군함이었다.
the day’s heat and the night’s cold. 
④  기계류와 무기를 싣고 있었다.
*insulate: 차단하다 ⑤  폭격을 받고 가라앉았다.
4
85
짝수형 영어 영역(B 형)
[31～36] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  33. During  the  hundreds  of  millions  of  years  that  plants 
have  been  living  on  our  planet,  they  have  become 
31. A  good  place  for  business  leaders  to  start  the  process 
amazingly  self-sufficient.  In  addition  to  establishing  a 
of  building  trust  is  by  becoming  more                        to 
useful  relationship  with  the  sun,  plants  have  learned  
their  employees.  Getting  out  of  the  office  and  mixing 
.  When  plants  die,  they  seem 
       
with  employees  is  a  simple  solution  to  a  very  common 
to  just  fall  on  the  ground  and  rot,  getting  eaten  by  many 
trust  problem.  In  organizational  improvement  workshops, 
bugs  and  worms.  However,  researchers  were  shocked  to 
we  often  ask,  “What  is  the  single  greatest  barrier  to 
discover  that  dead  plants  get  consumed  only  by  particular 
improving communication and trust between you and your 
bacteria  and  fungi.  Plants  know  how  to  attract  to  their 
manager?”  In  many  cases,  the  first  response  is,  “I  never 
own  rotting  only  those  microorganisms  and  earthworms 
see  her.  She’s  always  in  a  meeting.”  The  employees  that  will  produce  beneficial  minerals  for  the  soil  where 
cannot  develop  a  perception  of  trust  with  higher-ups  the  plants’  siblings  will  grow.  One  way  plants  attract 
when  some  dont  even  know  what  they  look  like.  If  particular  microorganisms  into  their  soil  is  by 
’
leaders  seldom  come  out  of  the  office,  choosing  to  concentrating  more  sugars  in  their  roots.  Thus  roots  such 
communicate  through  email  instead,  they  are  no  longer  a  as  carrots  and  potatoes  are  always  much  sweeter  than  the 
rest  of  the  plant.  Apparently,  the  quality  of  the  soil  is 
part of that organization.
 
critically  important,  not  only  as  a  source  of  water  and 
frank similar visible
①  ②  ③ 
minerals for plants but for their very survival.
grateful subjective
④  ⑤ 
to grow their own soil
① 
to extend their lifespan
② 
to consume microorganisms
③ 
to survive attacks of bacteria 
④ 
to keep the environment clean
⑤ 
34. As they try to maneuver through times of guilt and 
austerity,  marketers  seek  tactics  that  they  hope  will 
32. There is a long and honorable history of procrastination  overcome  consumers’  guilt  and  negative  self-regard―and 
to suggest that many ideas and decisions may well improve  will  as  a  result  revive  consumption.  New  research  on 
consumer  behavior  suggests  that  an  effective  tactic  can 
if  postponed.  It  is  something  of  a  truism  that  to  put  off 
be  to  acknowledge  consumers’  unconscious  attempts 
making  a  decision  is  itself  a  decision.  The  parliamentary 
. Research has shown that 
process  is  essentially  a  system  of  delay  and  deliberation.           
people  engage  in  compensatory  behavior  when  their 
So, for that matter, is the creation of a great painting, or an 
self-image deviates from its standard level. In other words, 
entree,  or  a  book,  or  a  building  like  Blenheim  Palace, 
when  a  person’s  self-image  dips,  the  individual  tries  to 
which  took  the  Duke  of  Marlborough’s  architects  and 
compensate  for  this  negative  self-regard  by,  for  example, 
laborers  15  years  to  construct.  In  the  process,  the  design 
refraining from purchasing or consuming a guilty pleasure. 
can  mellow  and  marinate.  Indeed,    can  be  the 
If, on the other hand, a person’s self-image rises above its 
assassin  of  elegance.  As  T.H.  White,  author  of  Sword  in 
standard  level,  the  individual  is  inclined  to  give  in  to 
the Stone, once wrote, time “is not meant to be devoured 
behaviors  that  are  otherwise  associated  with  feelings  of 
in  an  hour  or  a  day,  but  to  be  consumed  delicately  and 
guilt.
  [3점]
gradually  and  without  haste.”  In  other  words,  what  you 
*austerity: , 
내핍 긴축
don’t  necessarily  have  to  do  today,  by  all  means  put  off 
to reveal their negative self-regard
① 
until tomorrow.
  [3점]
to avoid criticism from others
② 
*truism: 
자명한 이치
to feel financially stable
③ 
caution hurry complexity
①  ②  ③  to balance their self-image
④ 
imitation system
④  ⑤  to minimize their guilty pleasure
⑤ 
5
86
영어 영역(B 형) 짝수형
35. One  time  a  person  on  my  team  came  to  me  with  a  37. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A),  (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
problem  she  was  having  at  work.  As  she  explained  her  Color adds beauty to our lives, but it does more than that. 
struggles  and  feelings,  I  tried  to  figure  out  what  exactly  Color serves important signaling functions, both natural and 
was bothering her. Her emotions were soon clear to me contrived  by  humans.  The  natural  and  human-made  world 
―
provides many color signals that help us identify things. I 
or  at  least  I  thought  they  were  clear as  she  began  to 
―
know a banana is ripe when it has turned yellow and I know 
cry.  I  went  around  the  desk  to  give  her  a  hug  and 
to  stop  when  the  traffic  light  turns  red.     (A)     , 
reassure  her,  thinking  that  was  what  she  wanted  and 
color helps facilitate perceptual organization, the process by 
needed from me. But I had gotten the situation all wrong. 
which  small  elements  become  grouped  perceptually  into 
She  absolutely  recoiled.  She  wasn’t  sad.  She  was  angry. 
larger objects. Color perception greatly facilitates the ability 
She  didn’t  want  me  to  do  anything  other  than  listen  and 
to  tell  one  object  from  another and especially to pick out 
acknowledge  the  truth  of  the  matter.  She  went  on  to  tell  objects  within  scenes,  an  ability  crucial  to  the  survival  of 
me  the  issues  that  were  causing  her  grief.  I  had  to  wait  many species. (B) , consider a monkey searching 
and  let  her  tell  me  what  she  meant.  True  listening  for  fruit  in  the  forest.  A  monkey  with  good  color  vision 
is . easily  detects  red  fruit  against  a  green  background,  but  a 
color-blind monkey would find it more difficult to find the 
bridging the gap between different viewpoints
①  fruit. Color vision thus enhances the contrast of objects that, 
simulating the speaker’s emotions and feelings
②  if they didn’t appear colored, would appear more similar.
working together to build a lasting relationship
③ 
(A) (B)
showing how you feel toward the people around you
④ 
⑤  creating a space for people to tell you what they mean ① In addition …… However 
In addition For example
② ……
In contrast Similarly
③ ……
Nonetheless Moreover
④ ……
Nonetheless On the other hand
⑤ ……
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
Here  is  an  uncomfortable  math  problem:  By  2045 
Earth’s  population  will  likely  have  swelled  from  seven 
to nine billion people.
36. In my mind, we do not invent laws in mathematics and  (A) Julian Cribb, author of The Coming Famine, says higher 
yielding  crop  varieties  and  more  efficient  farming 
science, but rather we discover them.  . 
methods will be crucial. So will waste reduction. Cribb 
I  believe  that  mathematical  laws  go  beyond  us  and  our 
and  other  experts  urge  cities  to  reclaim  nutrients  and 
physical reality. The statement “3+1=8” is false. Was the 
water from waste streams and preserve farmland.
statement false before the discovery of integers? I believe it 
(B) Poor countries, they say, can improve crop storage and 
was. Numbers and mathematics exist whether humans know 
packaging.  And  rich  nations  could  cut  back  on 
about them or not. Martin Gardner once stated this idea as: 
resource-intensive  foods  like  meat.  In  fact,  wherever 
“If  two  dinosaurs  met  two  other  dinosaurs  in  a  clearing, 
easy access to cheap food means people buy more than 
there  would  be  four  of  them  even  though  the  animals 
they consume, we could all start by shopping smarter
―
would  be  too  stupid  to  know  that.”  In  other  words,  four 
and cleaning our plates.
dinosaurs are now in the clearing, whether or not humans 
(C) To fill all those stomachs while accounting for shifting 
―
are around to appreciate this fact. 
[3점]
consumption  patterns,  climate  change,  and  a  finite 
*integer: 정수 amount of farmland and drinkable water―some experts 
say  global  food  production  will  have  to  double.  How 
They are subject to changes and modifications
① 
can we make the numbers add up?
They have an existence independent from us
② 
Most of them originated from numbers (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③  ①  - - ②  - -
They are key to learning basic calculation (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④  ③  - - ④  - -
Logical investigations give them true meaning (C) (B) (A)
⑤  ⑤  - -
6
87
짝수형 영어 영역(B 형)
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한  [41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
곳은?
Before  1969,  a  watch  was  just  a  watch.  There  were 
But  they  ran  out  of  the  special  offers  so  you  have  to  manual  and  automatic-winding  watches,  calendar 
buy another of the meals at full price.  watches,  and  many  other  types  of  watches.  All  were 
powered  by  mechanical-movement  systems,  and  accuracy 
On  the  way  home  from  work  you  see  an  excellent 
was  of  the  utmost  importance.  In  1969,  quartz  watches 
bargain:  a  really  good  ready  meal  at  25  percent  of  the 
were  introduced.  They  were  much  more  accurate  than 
usual cost. (   ) You snap up one but when you get home 
① previous  watches and  much  cheaper.  Within  a  decade 
―
you feel like having a friend around. (   ) You phone, she 
② of  their  introduction,  quartz  watches  dominated  the 
agrees,  so  you  pop  out  for  another  bargain.  ( )  The 
③ industry.  Mechanical  watch  makers  faced  two  obvious 
worst  is  to  come:  you  heat  up  both  meals  and  then  your 
but  unattractive  options:  Attempt  a  highly  uncertain 
friend phones to say something has come up and she can’t 
transition  to  produce  quartz  movement  or  redouble 
make it. (   ) You have two hot, unreheatable meals: you 
④ efforts  to  improve  the  price  and  performance  of  their 
have  to  throw  one  away.  (    )  Despite  the  fact  that  the 
⑤ mechanical-movement  devices,  thereby  merely  narrowing, 
meals  are  identical,  economists  say,  people  nearly  always 
but not closing, the performance gap with quartz.
eat the one for which they paid full price. 
Insightful  firms,  however,  recognized  a  third  option. 
They realized that the rise of the quartz watch meant that 
for  the  first  time,  consumers  could  choose  between 
mechanical  and  nonmechanical  watches.  In  other  words, 
the  introduction  of  nonmechanical  watches  made  some 
(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
consumers aware of their preference for “mechanicalness.” 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
These  watchmakers  began  their  products 
with this type of consumer in mind. One result was a shift 
Classification allows us to focus on one or two features 
from  the  industry  norm  of  hiding  watch  mechanisms 
and see something in terms of those characteristics alone. 
within the case to making parts visible in order to show 
To classify plants and animals, we have to ignore all the 
off  the  increasingly  complicated,  visually  stimulating 
variations  that  distinguish  one  plant  from  another  and 
mechanical movements.
one  animal  from  another.  We  have  to  focus  only  on 
Clearly, the niche of consumers who valued the mechanical 
those  aspects  that  are  shared  by  all  plants  and  that 
quality  of  a  watch  was  smaller  than  the  larger  watch 
differentiate them from all animals. We ignore the great 
market. However, these consumers were willing to pay a 
variation  that  exists  within  each  group  and  reduce  its 
higher price. And perhaps more important, this niche was 
members  to  the  common  ground  that  ties  all  the 
immune to attack from quartz watchmakers.
members of that group together. As a result, we come to 
see objects in terms of their membership in a particular 
group,  and  we  miss  seeing  that  each  is  more  than  its  41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
group membership. Trapped by the category of doors, we 
Mechanical vs. Nonmechanical: Accuracy Matters?
① 
become blind to the three-by-seven-foot pieces of wood 
Chronological Transition in the Styles of Watch
② 
that are right in front of us.
An Innovative Technology in Watchmaking 
③ 
??
Quartz Movement Rules the Watch Market
④ 
Finding a Niche: A Case of Watchmakers
⑤ 
In  classification,  we  concentrate  on  a  few  features 
(A)  to group members, and in doing so, we 
tend  to  (B)   individual  variations  within  the 
group.
(A) (B)
varying identify
① ……
existing verify
② ……
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
special prefer
③ ……
④ important …… include ①  redesigning ②  downsizing ③  discontinuing
common overlook exporting advertising
⑤ …… ④  ⑤ 
7
88
영어 영역(B 형) 짝수형
(A)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
(A) 가장 적절한 것은?
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
About  eight  years  ago  storyteller  Melissa  Heckler  ①  - - ②  - -
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
arrived  at  a  school  ready  to  tell  a  few  tales.  Her  ③  - - ④  - -
(D) (C) (B)
classroom  audience  included  children  at  risk  because  of  ⑤  - -
learning  difficulties,  poverty,  and  other  problems.  The 
school suggested that Heckler not tell any family stories, 
assuming that the last thing such kids wanted to hear or 
talk  about  was  family  life.  So  (a)she  told  the  students 
folk  tales.  “To  everyone’s  surprise,  the  kids  who  were  (a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ∼   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
most  at  risk  were  the  most  responsive,”  says  Heckler. 
것은? 
“They  used  the  stories  as  a  mask as  a  way  to  tell 
― (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③    ④  ⑤   
their own secrets.”
(B)
Heckler  also  asks  the  kids  to  collect  stories  from 
family  members  and  friends.  To  make  telling  those 
Heckler
stories  a  playful  activity  during  class,  (b)she  sometimes  45. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 
has  the  children  present  their  stories  as  if  they  were  8
①  약  년 전에 이야기를 해 주려고 어느 학교에 갔다.
doing  a  radio  program,  complete  with  a  student 
②  학교로부터 가족 이야기를 하지 말라는 제안을 받았다.
moderator  and  guest  appearances  by  student  storytellers. 
③  아이들로 하여금 친구의 이야기는 수집하지 않도록 한다.
Or they might act out a TV show and tell the tales to a 
④  아이들의 솔직함에 놀란다.
video  camera.  Other  times  the  kids  simply  share  the  ⑤  그녀 이야기의 레퍼토리는 민간설화에 국한되지 않는다.
stories with their classmates. 
(C)
Regardless  of  how  the  stories  are  staged,  the  children 
continually  surprise  Heckler  with  their  honesty  and  their 
revelations. “One girl’s father was a firefighter,” remembers 
Heckler,  “and  she  told  a  story  about  her  father’s  being 
injured  on  the  job.  When  the  girl  told  the  story,  she 
showed  so  much  dignity,  and  from  that  day,  the  other 
kids  treated  (c)her  differently,  more  kindly.  Telling  their 
own  stories  gives  them  a  chance  to  express  their  heart 
and  their  strengths.  They  begin  to  see  their  own 
richness.”
(D)
Heckler’s repertoire does not stop with folk tales. (d)She 
also uses personal stories, her own and the children’s, to 
draw  the  kids  out.  She  may  have  the  children  ask  her 
questions, or (e)she may simply tell a tale about herself. 
“It  doesn’t  matter  whether  you’ve  had  a  rough  life  or  a 
privileged  one.  What  matters  is  that  you’re  telling  them 
your  story,”  explains  Heckler.  “They  have  to  sense  that 
what you’re telling them is real. They need to see you as 
**   확확인인  사사항항
a  person.  That  will  help  them  open  up  and  tell  their 
??답답안안지지의의  해해당당란란에에  필필요요한한  내내용용을을  정정확확히히  기기입입((표표기기))했했는는지지  확확인인
stories.” 
하하시시오오..
8
81
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Good idea. Let’s do it this Friday.
① 
Sorry. I had to leave early yesterday.
② 
No. The team meeting was canceled.
③ 
Thanks. We had a great time at the party.
④ 
Sure. We must hire him for our company.
⑤ 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Instead, you need to learn sign language. 7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 
Actually, I didn’t read that news article.
②  ①  장소 정하기 ②  의자 나르기
Well, let’s plan a field trip with them.
③  ③  재료 구매하기 ④  메뉴 결정하기
Yeah, we had enough parking spaces.
④  ⑤  전단 복사하기
Then, I’ll get him to sign your book.
⑤ 
Ben Tyler 
8. 대화를 듣고,  여자가  콘서트에 갈 수 없는  이유를 
고르시오.
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오. ①  부모님과 저녁 식사를 해야 해서
②  가족 파티를 준비해야 해서
①  우체국 이전을 안내하려고
③  팀 프로젝트를 끝내야 해서
②  동호회 가입을 권유하려고
④  수업을 들으러 가야 해서
③  여행 상품 정보를 제공하려고
⑤  동생을 돌봐야 해서
④  이사 업체 직원을 모집하려고
⑤  동영상 제작 방법을 설명하려고
9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$54 $63 $70
4. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을  ①  ②  ③ 
$81 $90
④  ⑤ 
고르시오.
①  대기 오염의 원인
Eugene Kim
②  기차 여행의 장점 10. 대화를 듣고,  에 관해 언급되지 않은  것을 고르시오.
③  교통 체증의 심각성
①  출생지 ②  수상작 제목 ③  집필한 책의 수
④  휴가 계획의 필요성 
④  집필 장소 ⑤  나이
⑤  안전 운전의 중요성
Science Quiz Olympics
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
않는  것을 고르시오.
①  초청 강사－행사 진행자
①  매년 열리는 행사이다.
②  호텔 투숙객－호텔 직원 ②  9월 23일 금요일에 개최된다.
③  보험 가입 고객－보험 설계사  ③  모든 참가자는 티셔츠를 받는다.
④  봉사 활동 희망자－도서관 직원 ④  참가하려면 신청서를 작성해야 한다.
⑤  도서 박람회 관람객－신문 기자 ⑤  행사 당일에 참가 신청이 가능하다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 구입할 세발자전거를  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
고르시오.
Dear Organizer,
Kids’ Tricycles for Sale
My name is Cathy Cameron. I’m writing in regards 
Helmet 
Model  Frame Warranty Price to the “Boston Red Sox Baseball Trip” for the game 
Included
with the Yankees taking place on Saturday, September 
A Plastic 1 year $65
① × 3rd. Unfortunately, I have just become aware that your 
B Steel 1 year $75
② ○ company’s limit of 53 people for registration has already 
C Steel 2 years $75
③ × been reached. However, I would really appreciate it if you 
D Steel 3 years $85
④ × could allow my son to register additionally. He is a big fan 
⑤ E Aluminum 3 years ○ $105 of the Red Sox, and this trip would make a great surprise gift 
for his birthday. If there is any way that he is able to join the 
trip, I would be very grateful. I’m sure it would give him the 
13. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
perfect birthday. I look forward to hearing from you soon.
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
Yours sincerely,
Man:
Cathy Cameron
Of course, it is. It’ll be good for your future career.
① 
②  Certainly. You’re scheduled to meet my assistant. ①  야구와 관련된 새로운 사업을 제안하려고 
I don’t think so. You can’t use the center for free. ②  야구 경기 관람권 구매 대행을 요청하려고
③ 
No way. You don’t want to work with children. ③  아들 생일 파티를 위한 장소 예약을 취소하려고
④ 
④  주말 가족 여행 일정 변경이 가능한지 문의하려고
Yes. It’s necessary to quit my part-time job.
⑤ 
⑤  야구 경기 관람 여행에 아들의 추가 등록을 부탁하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘Amy’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
Amy  was  in  the  classroom  staring  out  of  the  window 
Woman: beside her. She thought how her gloomy face in the window 
reflected her mistake. She tried not to think about her terrible 
Sorry. I don’t have the same interests as you.
① 
performance in class. Watching Amy look so discouraged, 
Thank you. It’ll help me make new friends.
② 
Laurie, her best friend, decided she needed some cheering up. 
Absolutely. I’ll give you some advice. 
③  So Laurie crossed her eyes and made a stupid face. Amy tried 
No thanks. I don’t like to play sports.
④  not to look, but Laurie was making another funny face. This 
Well done. It was a wonderful game.
⑤  time she couldn’t help turning back to see what her friend was 
doing. It was her famous fish face: she was pushing her ears 
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Jenny가 Daniel에게 할 말로 가장  out, crossing her eyes, and opening her mouth wide. Amy 
laughed hard. She felt that she was lucky to have a friend that 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
could always cheer her up when she was feeling down.
Jenny:
relaxed frustrated satisfied ashamed
①  →  ②  → 
Why don’t you move to the dormitory?
①  bored exhausted excited frightened
③  →  ④  → 
You’d better find a quiet place to study.
②  depressed comforted
⑤  → 
You should major in computer engineering.
③ 
How about taking a summer course together?
④  20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
You need to follow the rules in the dormitory.
⑤ 
My barely-five-year-old son couldn’t go to bed one night until 
he wrote “I love you Mom” on a piece of paper. Pajamas on, red 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. crayon in hand, he was very determined. A few mixed-up letters, 
a couple of crumpled papers, and some help from Daddy later, 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
he handed me his heart on the page. Then, finally, he relaxed 
benefits of cooking at home
①  enough to fall asleep. Sometimes, saying how you feel just isn’t 
lives of great chefs in history
②  enough. Spoken words are invisible and untouchable. Write 
③  tips for cooking with leftover food it down, however, and you can see it, feel it, hold it, keep it 
children’s snacks made from grains forever. Although we may think it, we can’t really give someone 
④ 
food products invented accidentally our heart. But by writing, we can give someone our heart on a 
⑤ 
page. A love note is a piece of paper that is a little piece of your 
heart. Teach your child how to write love notes, and I promise 
17. 언급된 음식이 아닌  것은?
you will have many, many happy returns.
corn flakes potato chips ice cream cones
①  ②  ③  *crumpled: 구겨진
onion rings chocolate chip cookies
④  ⑤ 
①  자녀의 활동에 동참하여 유대감을 강화하라.
②  자녀가 글을 통해 마음을 표현하도록 가르치라.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에  ③  자녀가 부모의 사랑을 느낄 수 있도록 행동하라.
④  자녀에게 대화를 통해 자연스럽게 감정을 표현하라.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤  자녀의 인지 능력 향상을 위해 글쓰기 교육을 하라.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
One of the most demanding, and at the same time inspiring,  A strategic vision has little value to the organization unless 
aspects of translating for children is the potential for such  it’s effectively communicated down the line to lower-level 
creativity that arises from what Peter Hollindale has called the  managers and employees. It would be difficult for a vision 
‘childness’ of children’s texts: ‘the quality of being a child statement to provide direction to decision makers and energize 
―
dynamic, imaginative, experimental, interactive and unstable’.  employees toward achieving long-term strategic intent unless 
The  ‘unstable’  qualities  of  childhood  that  Hollindale  cites  they know of the vision and observe management’s commitment 
to  that  vision.  Communicating  the  vision  to  organization 
require a writer or translator to have an understanding of the 
members nearly always means putting “where we are going and 
freshness of language to the child’s eye and ear, the child’s 
why” in writing, distributing the statement organizationwide, 
affective  concerns  and  the  linguistic  and  dramatic  play  of 
and having executives personally explain the vision and its 
early childhood. Translating sound, for example, whether in 
justification to as many people as possible. Ideally, executives 
the read-aloud qualities of books for the younger child, in 
should present their vision for the company in a manner that 
animal  noises,  children’s  poetry  or  in  nonsense  rhymes, 
reaches out and grabs people’s attention. An engaging and 
demands imaginative solutions as indeed does working with 
―
convincing strategic vision has enormous motivational value
―
visual material. Such multi-faceted creativity has, at times, 
for the same reason that a stone mason is inspired by building 
placed  children’s  literature  at  the  forefront  of  imaginative  
a great cathedral for the ages. 
experimentation.
*multi-faceted: 다면의 *stone mason: 석공   **cathedral: 대성당
What Makes a Strategic Vision Successful?
①
① 아동문학 번역에서는 아동의 특성에 기반을 둔 창의성이 요구된다.
Why Is Creating a Vision Statement Difficult?
②
② 아동문학 속 다양한 의성어는 아동의 창의성 발달에 도움이 된다.
Building a Future: Innovative Leadership Training
③
③ 아동문학 번역가는 아동의 태도를 긍정적으로 변화시키는 데 기여한다.
Effective Decision-Making Processes in Organizations
④
④ 아동문학가는 아동의 성장 과정을 구체적으로 표현할 수 있어야 한다.
Motivating Employees through Organizational Development
⑤
⑤ 아동문학은 아동 언어 발달에 도움이 되는 다양한 요소들을 담고 있다.
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
From an evolutionary perspective, fear has contributed to 
both  fostering  and  limiting  change,  and  to  preserving  the 
species. We are programmed to be afraid. It is a survival need, 
as is stability, which is another force of nature that can limit 
the capacity to change. Stable patterns are necessary lest we 
live  in  chaos;  however,  they  make  it  difficult  to  abandon 
entrenched behaviors, even those that are no longer useful, 
constructive, or health creating. And fear can keep you from 
The  above  graph  shows  the  percentage  of  Americans  in 
changing when you don’t want to risk a step into unknown 
different age groups who said it was “generally OK” to use a 
territory; for example, some people choose not to leave an 
cellphone in different settings in 2014.  In the setting of “On 
①
unfulfilling job or a failing relationship because they fear the 
public transportation,” the younger groups are more accepting 
unknown more than the known. On the other hand, fear can  than the older ones regarding cellphone use.  “When walking 
②
also motivate change in order to avoid something you’re afraid  down the street” is the setting in which people aged 30-49 are 
of, such as dying young as one of your parents might have.  more permissive towards cellphone use than the other age 
―
groups.  As for “At restaurants,” 50% of the 18-29 year olds 
*entrenched: 굳어버린  ③
answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones while 26% of those 
fear’s negative roles in cases of chaos
①  65 and older say the same.  Only 4% of people in each of the 
④
②  effective strategies for maintaining stability two age groups, 30-49 and 50-64, agree that cellphone use is 
③  fear and its dual functions in terms of change acceptable in the setting of “At movie theaters or other quiet 
the necessities of reducing a fear of the unknown places.”  In the same setting, less than 10% of people in each 
④  ⑤
ways of confronting fear to overcome difficulties in life age group answer that it is acceptable to use cellphones.
⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
!Kung San Fashion Career Discovery Day
25. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
The !Kung San, also known as the Bushmen, live in the  일치하는 것은?
Kalahari Desert in southern Africa. The “!K” in the name 
“!Kung” is like the sound that occurs when a cork is pulled  Fashion Career Discovery Day
from  a  bottle.  Traditionally,  they  lived  by  hunting  and 
Experience our Fashion Career Discovery Day and unlock 
gathering,  the  way  of  life  that  was  the  universal  mode  of 
pathways to a fulfilling career in fashion! Your day will 
human existence until 10,000 years ago. The total population 
include interviews with professional designers, as well as the 
of the !Kung San in 1986 was about 15,000, with most of 
opportunity to watch a fashion show.
them  living  in  nonhunting  and  gathering  situations  on 
Date: Saturday, November 5, 2016
cattleposts  or  farms.  The  !Kung  San  in  the  Dobe  area  of 
Time: 10 a.m. 4 p.m. 
Botswana were divided into twenty five groups with a mean  ?
Location: Pavilion Fashion Plaza
size of eighteen to twenty people. The !Kung San in that area 
716 East Livera Street
had abundant food supply and a lot of leisure time. The main 
Ticket Price: $20 per person (lunch and souvenir included)
food crop was the wild mongongo nut, millions of which were 
harvested every year. A minimum of 15 participants is necessary for group 
bookings to receive a 10% discount.
Kalahari
① 남부 아프리카    사막에 산다.
Reservations are required and must be made on our website 
“!K”
② 이름 속  는 병에서 코르크 마개를 뽑을 때 나는 소리와 유사하다.
(www.pfp2016.org) by 6 p.m., Thursday, November 3, 2016. 
1986 15,000
③ 년에 전체 인구가 약  명이었다.
Botswana Dobe 25 Please email us at fashioncdd@pfp2016.org for further 
④ 의    지역에서는  개의 그룹으로 나뉘어 있었다.
Dobe information.
⑤   지역에서 식량은 부족했지만 여가 시간은 많았다.
① 전문 디자이너들과의 인터뷰는 포함되어 있지 않다.
26. 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? ② 11월 5일부터 이틀간 진행된다. 
③ 티켓 가격에 점심과 기념품이 포함된다.
10
④ 명부터 단체 할인이 적용된다.
Name Our Sports Center!
⑤ 예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
The grand opening of our brand-new sports 
center is on November 30th, but we still don’t 
28. (A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 
have a name! Please take this opportunity to be part of 
적절한 것은?  [3점]
Watford Community history, and help us name it!
Like life in traditional society, but unlike other team sports, 
Entry Submission
baseball is not governed by the clock. A football game is 
September 1st 30th on our website (www.watfordcc.org)
? ?
comprised of exactly sixty minutes of play, a basketball game 
The three best entries will be selected by the Watford  forty or forty-eight minutes, but baseball has no set length of time 
volunteer group and will be made available online for 
within which the game must be completed. The pace of the game 
voting to decide the winner.
is therefore leisurely and (A)unhurried/unhurriedly, like the 
Vote world  before  the  discipline  of  measured  time,  deadlines, 
October 15th 31st on our website schedules, and wages paid by the hour. Baseball belongs to the 
? ?
kind of world (B)which/in which people did not say, “I haven’t 
Winner Announcement
got all day.” Baseball games do have all day to be played. But that 
November 3rd on our website
?
does not mean that they can go on forever. Baseball, like 
Prize: a one-year sports center membership
?
traditional life, proceeds according to the rhythm of nature, 
We’re looking for the most dynamic and fun names, 
specifically the rotation of the Earth. During its first half century, 
so get your entries in now!
games were not played at night, which meant that baseball games, 
Watford Community Council  like the traditional work day, (C)ending/ended when the sun set.
(A) (B) (C)
①  스포츠센터 개장일은 11월 30일이다. ① unhurried …… in which …… ended
unhurried which ending
②  응모작 제출은 웹사이트에서 진행된다. ② …… ……
unhurriedly which ended
③  최상위 응모작 세 개가 온라인 투표 대상이 된다.  ③ …… ……
unhurriedly which ending
④  투표는 두 달 동안 웹사이트에서 진행된다. ④ …… ……
1 unhurriedly in which ended
⑤  우승 상품은 스포츠센터  년 회원권이다. ⑤ …… ……
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
29. (A),  (B),  (C)의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은? 31. A sleeping mother has the ability to identify the particular 
You can’t have a democracy if you can’t talk with your 
cry of her own baby. This is one of the bonding factors that 
neighbors about matters of mutual interest or concern. Thomas 
has been forgotten because of the way in which we live today. 
Jefferson, who had an enduring interest in democracy, came 
Typically, there is now only one newborn baby in any family 
to a similar conclusion. He was prescient in understanding 
house or apartment, so there is no way to test this ability. In 
the dangers of (A)concentrated/limited power, whether in  an ancient tribe, however, living in small huts in a tiny village 
corporations or in political leaders or exclusionary political 
settlement, a mother would have been able to hear any of the 
institutions. Direct involvement of citizens was what had made 
babies crying in the night. If she woke up every time one of 
the American Revolution possible and given the new republic 
them screamed for food, she might get no sleep at all. During 
vitality and hope for the future. Without that involvement, the 
the course of evolution she became programmed to awake 
republic would die. Eventually, he saw a need for the nation to 
only at the sound of her own particular baby. This
   
be (B)blended/subdivided into “wards”―political units so  is still there to this day, even though it is seldom used.  [3점]
small that everyone living there could participate directly in 
affection creativity sociability
①  ②  ③ 
the political process. The representatives for each ward in the 
intolerance sensitivity
④  ⑤ 
capital would have to be (C)resistant/responsive to citizens 
organized in this way. A vibrant democracy conducted locally 
would then provide the active basic unit for the democratic life 
of the republic. With that kind of involvement, the republic might 
survive and prosper.
*prescient: 선견지명이 있는   **vibrant: 활력이 넘치는
(A) (B) (C)
concentrated blended resistant
① …… ……
concentrated subdivided responsive
② …… ……
concentrated subdivided resistant
③ …… ……
limited subdivided resistant
④ …… ……
limited blended responsive
⑤ …… ……
32. When people try to control situations that are essentially 
uncontrollable, they are inclined to experience high levels of 
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
stress. Thus, suggesting that they need to take active control is 
Harumi  Tanaka,  from  Osaka,  Japan,  had  accepted  an 
bad advice in those situations. What they need to do is to accept 
assignment in Boston. His task was to explore the possibility 
that some things are beyond their control. Similarly, teaching 
of developing joint ventures with American firms.  He had 
①
people to accept a situation that could readily be changed could 
been invited by one company to spend a month there and 
be bad advice; sometimes the only way to get what you want is 
had been assigned an office and a research assistant. Harumi 
to take active control. Research has shown that when people who 
agreed on a Monday to present a business plan the following 
feel  helpless  fail  to  take  control,  they  experience  negative 
Friday. On Tuesday, the computers in the company crashed, 
emotional states such as anxiety and depression. Like stress, 
and the research assistant called in sick with a severe case of 
these negative emotions can damage the immune response. We 
the flu. Still, Harumi pushed forward and presented  his 
②
can see from this that health is not linearly related to control. For 
plan on Friday. He began his presentation, “I’m sorry that 
optimum health, people should be encouraged to take control to 
I am not well prepared. This meeting may not be a good 
③
a point  .
use  of  your  time.”  He  then  went  into  a  clear,  interesting    [3점]
presentation. After the meeting, one of the American executives  ① but to yield to the situations within their control
said, “ I don’t know why you had to apologize. Everyone  but to disregard immune response when stressed 
④ ②
knows about the computer crash and your assistant’s illness.”  but to recognize when further control is impossible
③
Harumi responded that he thought that the apology would be  and to fight against uncontrollable situations persistently
④
a good introduction to  his presentation. and to try harder to conquer uncontrollable stressful situations
⑤ ⑤
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. A good deal of the information stored in working memory is  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은? 
encoded in an auditory form, especially when the information is 
The pull effect of a destination can be positively influenced 
language based. For example, in an early study by Conrad, adults 
by the introduction and reinforcement of pro-tourism policies 
were shown six-letter sequences, with letters being presented 
that make a destination more accessible.  Governments, for 
①
visually, one at a time, at intervals of three-fourths of a second. 
example,  can  and  often  do  employ  awareness  campaigns 
As soon as the last letter of a sequence had been presented, 
among the resident population to promote a welcoming attitude 
participants in the study wrote down all six of the letters they had 
towards visitors, in order to foster a positive market image. 
seen, guessing at any letters they couldn’t easily recall. When 
However, because such campaigns depend on widespread 
②
people recalled letters incorrectly, the letters they said they had 
social  engineering,  and  because  their  effects  can  be 
seen were more likely to resemble the actual stimuli in terms 
counteracted by random acts of violence, positive outcomes 
of  . 
cannot  be  guaranteed.  Most  governments  in  developing 
③
For example, the letter F was “remembered” as the auditorially 
countries  encourage  international  tourism  because  tourists 
similar letter S 131 times but as the visually similar letter P only 
from wealthy countries usually spend more.  Furthermore, 
④
14 times. Similarly, the letter V was remembered as B 56 times 
it is the behaviour of some tourists, and the structure and 
but as X only 5 times.
  [3점] development of tourism itself, that often generate negative 
how the letters were visually represented attitudes within the host community.  This implies that major 
① ⑤
how the letters sounded than how they looked structural  changes  to  tourism  itself,  rather  than  awareness 
②
how the length of the letter sequence was recognized campaigns, may be required to foster a welcoming attitude. 
③
how the letters were ordered than how they were pronounced
④
how often the letters appeared than how long they were shown
⑤
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
34. Even if it is correct to say that we express and represent  것을 고르시오.
our thoughts in language, it may be a big mistake to suppose 
36.
that there are structural similarities between what is doing the 
Psychologists  Dember  and  Earl  suggested  that  the 
representing and what is represented. Robert Stalnaker, in his 
motivation for exploration had its roots in a curiosity drive.
book Inquiry, suggests an analogy with the representation of 
numbers: The number 9 can be represented as ‘12 3’ but it 
?
(A) This is very important for understanding why people will 
does not follow that 12, 3, or subtraction are constituents of 
often return to explore things that they explored before or 
the number 9. We could compare a thought and its verbal 
do things they have done before. In our daily lives, for 
expression with toothpaste and its ‘expression’ from a tube. 
example, we might decide to listen to a piece of music that 
That  the  result  of  expressing  toothpaste  is  a  long,  thin, 
we have listened to many times.
cylinder does not entail that toothpaste itself is long, thin, or 
cylindrical. Similarly, a thought might get expressed out loud  (B) By returning to that music with a new or fresh perspective, 
in a statement with a particular linguistic structure. It does not  perhaps as a result of listening to other music, we find 
follow that  .  something new and interesting. One reason that people can 
Suppose, for example, that I look at a fruit bowl, and think  play a card game such as bridge over and over is that no 
that there is an apple and an orange in that bowl. The objects  matter how many times you have played the game, it will be 
in front of my eyes include some pieces of fruit and a bowl,  different in some way. 
but no object corresponding to the word ‘and’ exists either in 
(C) They suggested that curiosity is stimulated by novelty and 
the world or in my visual image.
  [3점] argued that novelty is in the eye of the beholder. We 
*subtraction: 빼기   **entail: 의미(함의)하다 could have seen something many times before, but as the 
result of having new skills or competence, we discover 
the thought itself has such a structure
①
new or different aspects of that object.
linguistic analysis of a thought is unlikely
②
the language in mind lacks a logical structure  (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ ①  － － ②  － －
a thought and its verbal expression are distinct (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ ③  － － ④  － －
the sentence structurally differs from the thought (C) (B) (A)
⑤ ⑤  － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.
The hunters, armed only with primitive weapons, were  This  dynamic  can  be  illustrated  with  the  example  of 
no real match for an angry mammoth. Many were probably  parents who place equal value on convenience and concern 
killed or severely injured in the close encounters that were  for the environment.
necessary to slay one of these gigantic animals. 
Our total set of values and their relative importance to us 
(A) Some of them may have traveled by small boat along the  constitute our value system. ( ) The way that we behave in 
①
coast, but many walked. Twenty thousand years ago, at the  a given situation is often influenced by how important one 
height of the last glacial period, sea level was so low that  value is to us relative to others. ( ② ) For instance, deciding 
dry land joined what are now separate continents. whether to spend Saturday afternoon relaxing with your family 
or exercising will be determined by the relative importance 
(B) But the rewards were great when one was brought down. 
that you place on family versus health. ( ) You feel value 
③
A single mammoth could feed, clothe, and supply a band 
conflict when you do something that is consistent with one 
for a long time. The hunters had followed the mammoths 
value but inconsistent with another equally important value. 
and other large animals eastward from Asia across what is 
( )  They  may  experience  value  conflict  if  they  buy 
④
now the Bering Sea.
disposable diapers for their babies. ( ) Consumers facing 
⑤
(C) Slowly, imperceptibly, and probably unconsciously, hunters  such  decisions  consider  not  only  the  product’s  immediate 
had moved across the land bridge and become the first  consumption outcomes but also the product’s general effect 
immigrants to the new land. Without the ice age, North  on  society,  including  how  the  manufacturer  behaves  (e.g., 
America might have remained unpopulated for thousands  toward the environment).
of years more. *diaper: 기저귀
*slay: 죽이다
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  ? ? ②  ? ? 40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸 (A), 
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  ? ? ④  ? ? (B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  ? ?
In science one experiment, whether it succeeds or fails, is 
logically  followed  by  another  in  a  theoretically  infinite 
progression. According to the underlying myth of modern 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
science, this progression is always replacing the smaller 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
knowledge of the past with the larger knowledge of the 
38. present, which will be replaced by the yet larger knowledge 
of the future. In the arts, by contrast, no limitless sequence of 
Even so, research confirms the finding that nonverbal cues 
works is ever implied or looked for. No work of art is 
are more credible than verbal cues, especially when verbal 
necessarily followed by a second work that is necessarily 
and nonverbal cues conflict.
better. Given the methodologies of science, the law of gravity 
and the genome were bound to be discovered by somebody; 
Researchers  have  reported  various  nonverbal  features  of 
the identity of the discoverer is incidental to the fact. But it 
sarcasm. ( ) Most disagree as to whether nonverbal cues 
①
appears that in the arts there are no second chances. We must 
are essential to the perception of sarcasm or the emotion that 
assume that we had one chance each for The Divine Comedy 
prompts it. ( ) Also, nonverbal cues are better indicators 
②
and King Lear. If Dante and Shakespeare had died before 
of speaker intent. ( ) As the nature of sarcasm implies a 
③
they wrote those works, nobody ever would have written them.
contradiction between intent and message, nonverbal cues  ??
may “leak” and reveal the speaker’s true mood as they do 
in deception. ( ) Ostensibly, sarcasm is the opposite of 
④ While scientific knowledge is believed to progress through 
deception  in  that  a  sarcastic  speaker  typically  intends  the  (A) experiments,  an  artistic  work  tends  to  be 
receiver to recognize the sarcastic intent; whereas, in deception  (B) to its creator with no limitless sequence implied.
the speaker typically intends that the receiver not recognize 
the deceptive intent. ( ) Thus, when communicators are  (A) (B)
⑤
attempting to determine if a speaker is sarcastic, they compare  successive unique
① ……
the  verbal  and  nonverbal  message  and  if  the  two  are  in  successive valuable
② ……
opposition, communicators may conclude that the speaker is  controlled valuable
③ ……
being sarcastic. incidental influential
④ ……
*sarcasm: 비꼼   **ostensibly: 표면상 ⑤ incidental …… unique
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
Meanwhile my father took me to a pony fair and let me try 
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
some ponies, but (b)he always found some fault with them, 
Three composers attended a show at the Cafe Concert des 
leaving me in despair. When Christmas was at hand, I had 
Ambassadeurs. There they heard performances of a song written 
abandoned all hope of getting one. Instead, I hung up the 
by one of them and a sketch written by the other two. After the 
biggest stocking I had. Waking up at 7 a.m., my little sisters 
performance, the three refused to pay their bill, telling the owner 
and I raced for the fireplace downstairs. While my sisters 
of the cafe: ‘You use the products of our labour without paying 
were delighted to find their stockings filled with presents, 
us for it. So there’s no reason why we should pay for your 
mine was empty. I went out into the yard and wept all by 
service’. The case went to court, and the composers won on 
myself. 
appeal. The decision extended an existing law on theatrical 
After an hour, my frustration reached its climax, when I saw 
performances to all musical works and all public performance 
a man riding a pony with a brand-new saddle. When he looked 
of those works. This decision created a new category of legal 
at our door, he just passed by, which caused me to break into a 
right the performing right and with it a new economic 
― ― flood of tears. Then, he said, “Kid, do you know a boy named 
relationship between music user and copyright owner. 
Lennie Steffens?” “That’s me,” I replied in tears. He said, 
As a result of the decision, these composers and others 
“I’ve been looking all over for your house. Why don’t you put 
including music publishers founded a society to enforce and 
your house number where it can be seen?” He went on saying, 
administer  their  performing  rights.  In  doing  so,  they 
“I should have been here at 7. Your father told me to bring the 
established  the  principle  and  practice  of  the  collective 
pony here and leave (c)him for you.”
administration of rights, based on the fact that with the 
― I’d never seen anything so beautiful as my pony. And finally, 
possible  exception  of  opera  performances it  was 
― I rode off into the fields. Thrilled by riding, I began to feast my 
impossible for a single composer or publisher to monitor 
eyes on the world around me. The trees seemed to be taking on 
every use of his or her work by singers, bands, promoters or, 
smiling faces and the birds seemed to be singing to congratulate 
in the twentieth century, broadcasters.  , the new 
me on getting my new friend. When I returned home, my father 
society was entrusted with the task of monitoring music use, 
asked, “Why did you come back so soon?” With a smile on my 
issuing licences to music users, negotiating fees, collecting 
face, I answered (d)him, “I didn’t want to make him feel tired. 
fees  and  finally  distributing  the  money  raised  to  the 
It’s his first day with me.” (e) He laughed and wiped away the 
composers and songwriters whose works were adding value 
tear stains from my face his heartfelt gesture of apology for 
―
to other people’s businesses.
such a long-delayed present. Bursting with happiness, I spent 
the rest of the day brushing my pony in the stable.
41. 윗글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
*stable: 마구간
the cultural significance of musical performance
①
strategies for creating public interest through music
② 43. 윗글의 마지막 단락에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
the rise of performing rights in music and its effects
③
witty and humorous joyful and heartwarming
① ②
performing arts for the public and their artistic value
④
gloomy and hopeless mysterious and adventurous
③ ④
the influence of the new society on increasing licence fees
⑤
desperate and discouraging
⑤
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e)  중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
Accordingly Nevertheless Otherwise (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
Conversely Similarly
④  ⑤ 
45. 윗글의 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
Lennie
① 아버지는  에게 조랑말을 위한 공간을 마련하도록 하였다.
Lennie
② 아버지는  를 조랑말 시장에 데리고 갔다.
Lennie
③ 의 여동생들은 크리스마스 선물을 받지 못했다.
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Lennie
④ 는 조랑말을 예정보다 늦게 받았다.
What interested me the most about the new house was the  Lennie
⑤ 는 마구간에서 조랑말을 솔질해 주었다.
stable in the backyard, in which my father let me make a 
small space for a pony. I believed that it meant that I would 
*  확인 사항
get a pony for Christmas. (a)He also said, “Lennie, someday 
you’ll have a pony of your own.” However, “some day” is a  ?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
pain to a boy who lives in and knows only “now.” 하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2017학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Actually, Mom’s not here.
①
Yes, he’s coming home soon.
②
Right. I won’t go to the party.
③
No, we didn’t order the gift yet.
④
Great. Let’s buy one at the store.
⑤
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
Okay. I’ll never be late for class again.
① 고르시오.
Right. You’ve got lots of time to finish.
②
①  예약 날짜 변경하기 ②  할인 쿠폰 출력하기
Really? I’d better get started right away.
③
③  레스토랑 예약하기 ④  기념사진 촬영하기
What? I’ve already written up the report.
④
⑤  저녁상 차리기
I see. I hope you can finish yours by tomorrow.
⑤
8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 조퇴하려는 이유를 고르시오.
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  ①  운전면허 시험에 응시하려고
고르시오. ②  동생을 집에 데려다 주려고
③  부모님 댁을 방문하려고
① 학생회장 선거를 홍보하려고
④  병원 진료를 받으려고
② 교통 봉사 참여를 독려하려고
⑤  워크숍에 참석하려고
③ 무단 횡단 자제를 당부하려고
④ 안전 교육 일정을 안내하려고
⑤ 주차 문제 해결을 촉구하려고 9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
$270 $290 $300 $320 $360
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오. 10. 대화를  듣고,  Sunrise Korean Folk Village  관광에  관해 
① 점심시간 중 여가 활동의 장점 두 사람이 언급하지 않은  것을 고르시오.  [3점]
② 직장 동료들과 잘 지내는 방법
①  체험 활동 내용 ②  참가 비용
③ 스트레스 해소와 건강과의 관계
③  식사 포함 여부 ④  참가 인원수
④ 독서가 정신 건강에 미치는 효과
⑤  소요 시간
⑤ 밴드 공연 시 악기 구성의 중요성
Pine Tree Family Park
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 않는  것을 고르시오.
Evergreen
①   호숫가에 위치하고 있다.
① 아나운서－리포터
② 출판업자－소설가 ② 두 달 전에 새롭게 단장했다.
1
③ 신문 편집자－만화가 ③ 인당 입장료를 인하했다.
30
④ 잡지 기자－문학 비평가 ④ 셔틀버스를  분마다 운행한다.
⑤ 영화 제작자－시나리오 작가 ⑤ 공원 크기를 늘렸다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  남자가  구입할 침낭을 고르시오. 18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Dear Ms. Molly Oliver,
This  is  Mark  Foster,  one  of  the  volunteers  for  the 
Auditory Frog and Toad Survey. Unfortunately, I was not 
① able to participate in the orientation last weekend, so I 
could not receive training in distinguishing the sounds of 
②
frogs and toads. I heard from another participant that a CD 
③
was used in the training session. I was wondering if you 
④
could send me one. Since we have ten more days before 
⑤ the survey begins, I’ll have enough time to receive and use 
the CD to train myself. You can send it to me at the 
address in my application. I am looking forward to hearing 
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  from you soon. Thank you.
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sincerely,
Woman: Mark Foster
Cheer up! You’ll do better next time.
①
Sure. Let’s go to the rock concert together. ① 자원 봉사 참가를 취소하려고
②
CD
② 를 보내 줄 수 있는지 문의하려고
I agree. The advanced level is right for you.
③
③ 신청서에 기입한 주소를 수정하려고
You’re doing a good job. We’re almost there.
④ ④ 양서류 생태 조사 일정을 확인하려고
Come on! Once you see it, you’ll want to try it.
⑤ ⑤ 오리엔테이션에 참석할 수 없음을 알리려고
she
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘ ’의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] When she heard the dogs barking fiercely on the floor just 
above  her,  she  trembled  uncontrollably  for  fear  of  being 
Man:
caught. Drops of cold sweat rolled down her back. Before 
Right. We can’t ignore complaints about the staff. slipping into the hold of the boat, she had scattered powder, 
①
Of course. Air conditioners will be very expensive. which Swedish scientists had developed, unnoticeably on the 
②
floor above in order to distract the dogs. But she knew that 
Yeah, but it’s important to keep our students happy.
③
these dogs were so well trained that they could smell her, even 
Then, I’ll teach you how to use the computer program.
④ though a load of fish had been dumped over her hiding place. 
Really? Sorry to hear the computer classes will be closed.
⑤ She held her hands together tightly and tried not to make any 
noise. She was not sure how long she could stay like that. To 
Mike Susan her relief, it wasn’t long before a whistle called the dogs out, 
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장 
leaving her unfound. She relaxed her hands and exhaled a 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
deep breath. She felt safe now.
Mike:
terrified relieved delighted frustrated
①  →  ②  → 
I had a great time shopping at the market. scared annoyed bored excited
① ③  →  ④  → 
I wouldn’t change my mind if I were you. disappointed exhausted
② ⑤  → 
You can repair your camera at the department store.
③
You should go to the department store this weekend. 20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
④
I wish I had gone to the electronics market with you. Have you ever met someone while you were experiencing 
⑤
significant  emotional,  psychological,  or  physical  stress? 
Perhaps you stayed up all night studying for a final, or maybe 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. you  learned  that  a  grandparent  recently  died.  You  likely 
exhibited  behaviors  that  are  not  consistent  with  how  you 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
usually  act.  Meeting  someone  when  you  are  extremely 
① effects and uses of colors stressed can create an inaccurate impression of you. For this 
functions and uses of shapes reason, recognize that our first impressions of others also may 
②
ways of constructing buildings be perceptual errors. To help avoid committing these errors, 
③
engage in perception checking, which means that we consider 
types and purposes of buildings
④
a series of questions to confirm or challenge our perceptions 
color preferences and personalities
⑤ of others and their behaviors. For example, see if you can 
provide  two  possible  interpretations  for  the  verbal  and 
nonverbal behavior observed and seek clarification of it in 
17. 언급된 장소가 아닌  것은?
order to determine the accuracy of your evaluation.
①  은행 ②  호텔 ③  병원 ④  학교 ⑤  사무실
① 상대방에 대한 자신의 인식에 오류가 없는지 점검하라.
② 정신적 스트레스가 심할 때는 타인과의 만남을 피하라.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에  ③ 처음 만나는 사람에게 좋은 인상을 주도록 노력하라.
④ 상대방의 심리를 파악하고 자신의 감정을 표현하라.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 언어적 행동과 비언어적 행동을 일치시켜라.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we see a happy face (or an angry one), it subtly  Savannas pose a bit of a problem for ecologists. There is an 
generates the corresponding emotion in us. To the degree we  axiom in ecology that ‘complete competitors cannot coexist’: 
take on the pace, posture, and facial expression of another  in  other  words,  where  two  populations  of  organisms  use 
exactly the same resources, one would be expected to do so 
person, we start to inhabit their emotional space; as our body 
slightly more efficiently than the other and therefore come to 
mimics  the  other’s,  we  begin  to  experience  emotional 
dominate in the long term. In temperate parts of the world, 
matching. Our nervous system is automatically set to engage 
either  trees  dominate  (in  forests)  or  grasses  dominate  (in 
in this emotional empathy. But how well we use this capacity 
grasslands). Yet, in savannas grasses and trees coexist. The 
is largely a learned ability. Animals and people who have 
－ －
classic explanation proposes that trees have deep roots while 
been raised in extreme social isolation are poor at reading 
grasses have shallow roots. The two plant types are therefore 
emotional cues in those around them not because they lack the 
able to coexist because they are not in fact competitors: the 
basic circuitry for empathy but because, lacking emotional 
trees increase in wetter climates and on sandier soils because 
tutors,  they  have  never  learned  to  pay  attention  to  these 
more water is able to penetrate to the deep roots. Trees do 
messages and so haven’t practiced this skill. indeed have a few small roots which penetrate to great depth, 
but most of their roots are in the top half-metre of the soil, just 
① 긍정적인 감정은 더 많은 공감을 불러일으킨다.
where the grass roots are.
② 사람과 동물은 모방하는 능력에서 차이를 보인다.
*axiom: 원리, 공리
③ 타인과 공감하는 능력을 잘 사용하려면 학습이 필요하다.
A War at Hand Between Plants in Savannas
④ 얼굴 표정은 상대방의 감정을 파악하는 중요한 단서이다. ①
A Rivalry for Wetter Soils among Savanna Trees
⑤ 인간이 타인과 공감하는 정도는 신경계에 의해 결정된다. ②
Are Savannas a Hidden Treasure of Bio-Diversity?
③
Cyclic Dominance of Trees over Grasses in Savannas
④
Strange Companions: Savanna Plants Confuse Ecologists
⑤
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
When we hear a story, we look for beliefs that are being 
commented  upon.  Any  story  has  many  possible  beliefs 
inherent in it. But how does someone listening to a story find 
those beliefs? We find them by looking through the beliefs we 
already  have.  We  are  not  as  concerned  with  what  we  are 
hearing as we are with finding what we already know that is 
The  graph  above  shows  the  Western  Hemisphere  oil 
relevant. Picture it in this way. As understanders, we have a 
production per day in 2010 and proven oil reserves as of 2011 
list of beliefs, indexed by subject area. When a new story 
for  selected  countries.  The  United  States  recorded  9.65 
①
appears, we attempt to find a belief of ours that relates to it. 
million barrels of daily oil production in 2010, the greatest 
When  we  do,  we  find  a  story  attached  to  that  belief  and  daily oil production among the countries shown on the graph. 
compare  the  story  in  our  memory  to  the  one  we  are  Canada had the second largest daily oil production followed 
②
processing. Our understanding of the new story becomes, at  by Mexico and Brazil, with Venezuela recording the lowest 
that point, a function of the old story. Once we find a belief  among the five countries in 2010.  As for proven oil reserves, 
③
and connected story, we need no further processing; that is,  however, Venezuela recorded the largest amount among these 
countries in 2011, possessing 211.2 billion barrels, followed by 
the search for other beliefs stops.
Canada with 175.2 billion barrels.  In 2011, the sum of the 
④
the use of a new story in understanding an old story
① proven oil reserves of the United States, Mexico, and Brazil 
the limits of our memory capacity in recalling stories
② was  greater  than  those  of  Venezuela.  Brazil  had  larger 
⑤
the influence of new stories on challenging our beliefs proven oil reserves than Mexico in 2011, but the daily oil 
③
the most efficient strategy to improve storytelling skills production of Brazil was lower than that of Mexico in 2010.
④
⑤ the role of our existing beliefs in comprehending a new story *proven oil reserves: 확인된 석유 매장량
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
Sequoyah 16th Springvale Book Festival
25. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
Sequoyah, a Cherokee Indian, was born in about 1770 in  일치하는 것은?
Taskigi, now in Tennessee. Raised by his Cherokee mother, 
the young Sequoyah never learned to read or write English.  16th Springvale Book Festival
While  interacting  with  English  speakers,  he  realized  the 
Saturday, June 4, 10 a.m. 5 p.m.
－
necessity  of  a  writing  system  for  the  Cherokee  people.  In 
Springvale Public Library 
about 1809, Sequoyah began developing a system of writing, 
(4536 Main Street, Springvale, WI)
adapting letters from English, Greek, and Hebrew. By 1821, 
he had created a system of 86 symbols, representing all the 
Mark  your  calendar  for  the  16th  Springvale  Book 
syllables  of  the  Cherokee  language.  The  Cherokee  people 
Festival. This is your big chance to meet the nation’s 
began to use the system in their schools and publish books 
BEST authors and discuss their works.
and  newspapers  in  their  language.  In  1824,  the  General 
Authors will be speaking at the main hall on the 2nd 
Council of the Eastern Cherokees awarded Sequoyah a medal 
floor from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.
in  honor  of  his  accomplishment.  Sequoyah  moved  to 
Oklahoma some years later and died in what is now Texas in  Note: Authors will be signing books in the lobby, so 
1843. And later, people remembered him by naming a certain  please bring your own personal copies or you can 
tree species “Sequoia.” purchase books on site.
*syllable: 음절 Get the most out of your big day by downloading the 
1770 Taskigi festival app at our website (www.spvbf.org). It features 
① 년경  에서 태어났다.
a complete list of all events & locations, maps, and ways 
② 어린 시절에 영어를 읽고 쓰는 법을 배웠다.
Cherokee to share it all via social media.
③   사람들을 위한 문자 체계의 필요성을 깨달았다.
1824
④ 업적을 인정받아  년에 메달을 받았다. All programs will be FREE of charge!
1843 Texas
⑤ 년에 지금의  에서 세상을 떠났다.
Please visit our website for more information about 
the festival.
Kingston Badminton Program
26. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
일치하지 않는  것은?
6 4 5
① 월  일부터  일간 개최된다.
Kingston Badminton Program ② 작가들의 강연이 오전에 예정되어 있다.
③ 행사장에서 구매한 책에 한정하여  작가들이 사인을 해 준다.
Are  you  looking  for  a  simple  and  effective  sports 
app
④ 웹 사이트에서 행사 정보 앱( )을 내려 받을 수 있다.
program?  Then  check  out  the  Kingston  Badminton 
⑤ 일부 프로그램의 경우 입장료를 지불해야 한다.
Program and choose one of our courses taught by the 
most experienced badminton coaches.
Course  sessions  will  be  held  three  days  a  week 
?
(Mondays,  Wednesdays,  and  Fridays)  for  4  weeks  28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?
from June 20 to July 15.
If  an  animal  is  innately  programmed  for  some  type  of 
3:00 p.m.－4:00 p.m.: Ages 7－10 behaviour, then there ①are likely to be biological clues. It is 
4:30 p.m. 5:30 p.m.: Ages 11 14  no accident that fish have bodies which are streamlined and 
－ －
6:00 p.m. 7:00 p.m.: Ages 15 and up smooth, with fins and a powerful tail. Their bodies are 
－ ②
structurally  adapted  for  moving  fast  through  the  water. 
The tuition fee is $50 per person with a free personal 
?
Similarly, if you found a dead bird or mosquito, you could 
locker.
guess by looking at  its wings that flying was its normal 
③
The deadline for registration is June 10.
? mode of transport. However, we must not be over-optimistic. 
Badminton rackets and shuttlecocks are provided. Biological clues are not essential. The extent to which they are 
?
finding varies from animal to animal and from activity to 
For further information, call the Kingston Community  ④
activity. For example, it is impossible to guess from their 
Center at 322 480 5267.
－ －
bodies that birds make nests, and, sometimes, animals behave 
in a way quite contrary to  what might be expected from 
3 4 ⑤
① 일주일에  일씩  주 동안 운영된다.
their  physical  form:  ghost  spiders  have  tremendously  long 
6 15
② 오후  시에는  세 이상을 대상으로 진행된다.
legs, yet they weave webs out of very short threads. To a 
③ 개인용 사물함을 이용하려면 추가 비용이 든다.
6 10 human observer, their legs seem a great hindrance as they spin 
④ 등록 마감일은  월  일이다.
and move about the web.
⑤ 배드민턴 라켓과 셔틀콕을 제공한다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
(A) (B) (C)
29. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은?  [3점] 31. Once a hand or gripper has been directed to an object by 
In  2001,  researchers  at  Wayne  State  University  asked  a  reaching, it can be grasped. Grasping requires that fingers hold 
group of college volunteers to exercise for twenty minutes at a  an object securely. A secure grip is one in which the object 
(A) preset/self-selected pace on each of three machines: a  won’t slip or move, especially when displaced by an external 
treadmill, a stationary bike, and a stair climber. Measurements  force. Your grasp on a hammer, for example, would not be 
of heart rate, oxygen consumption, and perceived effort were  secure if knocking against something caused you to drop it. 
taken throughout all three workouts. The researchers expected  One precondition of a firm grasp is that the forces applied by 
to  find  that  the  subjects  unconsciously  targeted  the  same  the fingers balance each other so as not to disturb the object’s 
relative physiological intensity in each activity. Perhaps they  position. The characteristics of an object such as its geometric 
would (B) automatically/intentionally exercise at 65 percent  configuration and mass distribution may demand that some 
of their maximum heart rate regardless of which machine they  fingers apply greater force than others to maintain   
.
were  using.  Or  maybe  they  would  instinctively  settle  into  The grasp and support forces must also match overall object 
rhythm  at  70  percent  of  their  maximum  rate  of  oxygen  mass and fragility. An egg requires a more delicate touch than 
consumption  in  all  three  workouts.  But  that’s  not  what  a rock.
  [3점]
happened. There was, in fact, no (C) consistency/variation  *geometric configuration: 기하학적 형태
in measurements of heart rate and oxygen consumption across  **fragility: 부서지기 쉬움
the three disciplines. Instead, the subjects were found to have 
distance efficiency
①  ② 
chosen the same level of perceived effort on the treadmill, the 
mobility direction
③  ④ 
bike, and the stair climber.
stability
⑤ 
*treadmill: 러닝머신
**physiological: 생리학적인
(A) (B) (C)
preset intentionally consistency
① …… ……
preset automatically variation
② …… ……
self-selected intentionally variation
③ …… ……
self-selected intentionally consistency 32. What story could be harsher than that of the Great Auk, the 
④ …… ……
self-selected automatically consistency large black-and-white seabird that in northern oceans took the 
⑤ …… ……
ecological place of a penguin? Its tale rises and falls like a 
Greek tragedy, with island populations savagely destroyed by 
humans until almost all were gone. Then the very last colony 
found  safety  on  a  special  island,  one  protected  from  the 
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
destruction of humankind by vicious and unpredictable ocean 
In the summer of 1972, the actor Anthony Hopkins was 
currents.  These  waters  presented  no  problem  to  perfectly 
signed  to  play  a  leading  role  in  a  film  based  on  George 
adapted  seagoing  birds,  but  they  prevented  humans  from 
Feifer’s  novel  The  Girl  from  Petrovka.  That  is  why  he 
① making any kind of safe landing. After enjoying a few years 
traveled to London to buy a copy of the book. Unfortunately, 
of comparative safety, disaster of a different kind struck the 
none of the main London bookstores had a copy. Then, on his 
Great Auk. Volcanic activity caused the island refuge to sink 
way  home,  waiting  for  an  underground  train  at  Leicester 
completely beneath the waves, and surviving individuals were 
Square tube station, he saw a discarded book lying on the seat 
forced to find shelter elsewhere. The new island home they 
next to  him. It was a copy of The Girl from Petrovka. As if 
② chose    in  one 
that was not coincidence enough, more was to follow. Later, 
terrible way. Humans could access it with comparative ease, 
when  he had a chance to meet the author, Hopkins told him 
③ and  they  did!  Within  just  a  few  years  the  last  of  this 
about this strange occurrence. Feifer was interested. He said to 
once-plentiful species was entirely eliminated.
  [3점]
him that in November 1971 he had lent a friend a copy of 
④
*savagely: 잔혹하게
the book a unique copy in which he had made notes on 
?
turning  the  British  English  into  American  English  for  the  ① lacked the benefits of the old
publication of an American version but his friend had lost  denied other colonies easy access
? ②
the copy in London. A quick check of the copy Hopkins had  faced unexpected natural disasters
③
found showed that it was the very same copy that  his friend  caused conflicts among the refugees
⑤ ④
had mislaid. had a similar disadvantage to the last island
⑤
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. It  is  not  hard  to  see  that  a  strong  economy,  where  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
opportunities  are  plentiful  and  jobs  go  begging, 
Roles are like a fence. They allow us a certain amount of 
.  Biased  employers 
freedom, but for most of us that freedom doesn’t go very far. 
may still dislike hiring members of one group or another, but 
Suppose that a woman decides that she is not going to wear 
when  nobody  else  is  available,  discrimination  most  often 
dresses or  a  man  that  he  will  not  wear  suits  and  ties
? ?
gives way to the basic need to get the work done. The same 
regardless of what anyone says.  In most situations, they’ll 
①
goes for employees with prejudices about whom they do and 
stick  to  their  decision.  When  a  formal  occasion  comes 
②
do not like working alongside. In the American construction 
along, however, such as a family wedding or a funeral, they 
boom of the late 1990s, for example, even the carpenters’ 
are likely to cave in to norms that they find overwhelming. 
union long known as a “traditional bastion of white men, a 
? The  increasing  social  pressure  discourages  us  from 
③
world where a coveted union card was handed down from 
fulfilling the social norms and committing ourselves to shared 
father  to  son” began  openly  encouraging  women,  blacks, 
? social conventions of behaviour.  Almost all of us follow 
④
and Hispanics to join its internship program. At least in the 
the guidelines for what is “appropriate” for our roles.  Few 
⑤
workplace,  jobs  chasing  people  obviously  does  more  to 
of us are bothered by such restrictions, for our socialization is 
promote a fluid society than people chasing jobs.
  [3점] so thorough that we usually want to do what our roles indicate 
*bastion: 요새 is appropriate.
**coveted: 부러움을 사는
allows employees to earn more income
①
helps break down social barriers
②
simplifies the hiring process
③
increases wage discrimination
④
improves the productivity of a company [36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
⑤
것을 고르시오.
36.
The ancient Greeks sought to improve memory through 
34. One remarkable aspect of aboriginal culture is the concept 
brain training methods such as memory palaces and the 
of “totemism,” where the tribal member at birth assumes the 
method of loci. At the same time, they and the Egyptians 
soul and identity of a part of nature. This view of the earth and 
became experts at externalizing information, inventing the 
its  riches  as  an  intrinsic  part  of  oneself  clearly  rules  out 
modern  library,  a  grand  storehouse  for  externalized 
mistreatment  of  the  environment  because  this  would  only 
knowledge.
constitute a destruction of self. Totems are more than objects. 
They  include  spiritual  rituals,  oral  histories,  and  the 
(A) This need isn’t simply learned; it is a biological imperative
?
organization of ceremonial lodges where records of the past 
animals organize their environments instinctively. Most 
travel routes of the soul can be exchanged with others and 
mammals  are  biologically  programmed  to  put  their 
converted  to  mythology.  The  primary  motivation  is  the 
digestive waste away from where they eat and sleep.
preservation of tribal myths and a consolidation and sharing of 
(B) We don’t know why these simultaneous explosions of 
every  individual’s  origins  in  nature.  The  aborigines  see
 
intellectual activity occurred when they did (perhaps daily 
, 
human experience had hit a certain level of complexity). 
through a hierarchy of totems that connect to their ancestral 
But  the  human  need  to  organize  our  lives,  our 
origins, a cosmology that places them at one with the earth, and 
environment, even our thoughts, remains strong.
behavior patterns that respect ecological balance.
  [3점]
*aboriginal: 원주민의 (C) Dogs have been known to collect their toys and put them 
**consolidation: 병합, 강화 in baskets; ants carry off dead members of the colony to 
burial grounds; certain birds and rodents create barriers 
themselves as incompatible with nature and her riches
①
around their nests in order to more easily detect invaders.
their mythology as a primary motive toward individualism
②
their identity as being self-contained from surrounding nature *method of loci: 장소를 활용한 기억법
③
their relationship to the environment as a single harmonious  **rodent: 설치류 동물
④
continuum (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
their communal rituals as a gateway to distancing themselves  (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
⑤ ③  － － ④  － －
from their origins (C) (B) (A)
⑤  － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.
Imitation  seems  to  be  a  key  to  the  transmission  of  For  example,  the  first  step  in  servicing  or  installing 
valuable practices among nonhumans. The most famous  equipment is talking with the clients to understand how 
example is that of the macaque monkeys on the island of  they used the equipment.
Koshima in Japan.
The customer service representatives in an electronics firm 
(A) In the early 1950s, Imo, a one-year-old female macaque,  under major restructuring were told they had to begin selling 
somehow hit upon the idea of washing her sweet potatoes  service contracts for their equipment in addition to installing 
in a stream before eating them. Soon it was hard to find a  and repairing them. This generated a great deal of resistance. 
Koshima macaque who wasn’t careful to wash off her  ( ) To the service representatives, learning to sell was a 
①
sweet potato before eating it.  very different game from what they had been playing. ( ) 
②
But it turned out they already knew a lot more about sales 
(B) Imo, though, realized that if you threw a handful of wheat 
than they thought. ( ) The same is true in selling. ( ) 
and sand into the ocean, the sand would sink and the  ③ ④
The salesperson first has to learn about the customer’s needs. 
wheat would float. Again, within a few years most of her 
( ) The service representatives also had a great deal of 
fellow macaques were throwing wheat and sand into the  ⑤
product  knowledge  and  hands-on  experience,  which  is 
sea and obtaining the benefits.
obviously important in sales.
(C) A  few  years  later,  Imo  introduced  another  innovation. 
Researchers on the island occasionally gave the monkeys 
wheat (in addition to sweet potatoes). But the wheat was  (A),
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸   
given  to  them  on  the  beach, where  it  quickly  became 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
mixed with sand.
Lawyers and scientists use argument to mean a summary 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － － of  evidence  and  principles  leading  to  a  conclusion; 
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  － － ④  － － however, a scientific argument is different from a legal 
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  － － argument. A prosecuting attorney constructs an argument 
to persuade the judge or a jury that the accused is guilty; a 
defense attorney in the same trial constructs an argument 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
to persuade the same judge or jury toward the opposite 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
conclusion. Neither prosecutor nor defender is obliged to 
38.
consider anything that weakens their respective cases. On 
That  is  why  people  experience  jet  lag  when  traveling  the contrary, scientists construct arguments because they 
across time zones. want  to  test  their  own  ideas  and  give  an  accurate 
explanation  of  some  aspect  of  nature.  Scientists  can 
In humans, body clocks are responsible for daily changes in 
include  any  evidence  or  hypothesis  that  supports  their 
blood  pressure,  body  temperature,  hormones,  hunger,  and 
claim,  but  they  must  observe  one  fundamental  rule  of 
thirst, as well as our sleep-wake cycles. ( ) These biological 
① professional science. They must include all of the known 
rhythms, which we experience as internal time, are probably 
evidence and all of the hypotheses previously proposed. 
older than sleep, developed over the course of millions of years  Unlike lawyers, scientists must explicitly account for the 
of  evolution.  ( ② )  They  facilitate  physiological  and  possibility that they might be wrong.
??
behavioral changes on a roughly twenty-four-hour cycle no 
matter what is happening outside, whether a cold front moves 
Unlike lawyers, who utilize information  (A)  to 
in or clouds block the light of the sun. ( ) Their internal 
③
support  their  arguments,  scientists  must  include  all 
clocks continue to run in accordance with the place they left 
information even if some of it is unlikely to  (B)  
behind, not the one to which they have come, and it can take 
their arguments.
some time to realign the two. ( ) The most remarkable thing 
④
is  that  our  internal  body  clocks  can  be  readjusted  by 
(A) (B)
environmental cues. ( ) We may get jet lag for a few days 
⑤
objectively weaken
when we ask our body clocks to adapt to a vastly different  ① ……
objectively support
schedule of day and night cycles on the other side of the Earth,  ② ……
accurately clarify
but they can do it.  ③ ……
[3점]
selectively strengthen
*facilitate: 쉽게 하다 ④ ……
selectively disprove
**realign: 재조정하다 ⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Handing a spray can of cream over to Richard, the waiter 
The idea of protecting intellectual activity and creation has 
said, “Add it now if you want.” Richard couldn’t help asking 
deep roots. The ancient Greeks used an awards system to 
him  why.  (b)The  blue-shirted  man  answered,  “Actually, 
(A)  design achievements, which performed some of 
hotter coffee loses energy faster than coffee cooled slightly 
the  same  functions  as  the  modern  patent  system.  Their 
by the addition of cream.” “Really? Is that so?” The waiter 
pottery,  sculptures,  and  other  manufactured  goods  had 
kindly smiled and said, “Yeah, I just learned it when I took a 
symbols on them to note the tradesmen who created them, 
class about coffee.” He also taught (c)his customer how to 
which are the predecessors of modern trademarks. Similar 
make shapes with the cream. Richard paid close attention to 
marks  and  symbols  functioning  as  trademarks  have  been 
his explanation.
found on Chinese pottery, possibly dating as far back as 
2698 BCE, and in many other ancient societies, including the  (C)
Egyptians, the Assyrians, and the Vedic civilization.
Looking  at  the  coffees,  Richard  remembered  that  Julie 
The concept of intellectual property continued to develop 
liked  whipped  cream  on  top  of  her  hot  coffee.  He  was 
during  the  Roman  period.  The  Roman  Empire  had  an  wondering if it was better to put the cream on now, or wait 
incredible variety of trademarks. Roman potters alone used  till she arrived. “Since the cream is cold, it’ll cool down the 
approximately  6,000  trademarks.  Additionally,  Roman  coffee faster,” he reasoned. Beep! It was a text message from 
authors  had  a  sense  that  their  intellectual  creations  were  her. “I’ll be there in 5 minutes. Please put some cream on my 
(B) , as they complained about the exploitation of  coffee.” He was startled, because she seemed to know 
those  creations.  Their  sense  of  injustice  was  probably  what he was thinking about. (d)Richard called over a 
heightened by the fact that there were laws and traditions in  waiter wearing a blue shirt and asked him for whipped cream.
place that supported their belief that only they could exploit 
(D)
their creations. Roman authors could, in fact, make money 
from the copying and publishing of their works because the  Richard  thanked  the  waiter.  Following  his  instructions, 
value of their intellectual creations was recognized. Richard made a flower with the cream. He tried to be as 
precise  as  he  could.  No  sooner  had  he  completed  his 
masterpiece, Julie stepped into the cafe. As she sat down, she 
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
saw her coffee. “Wow, look at that! A white flower in the cup! 
①  Early Development of Intellectual Property Protection It looks so beautiful, Richard! It’s too lovely to drink,” his 
History of Roman Intellectual Property Law friend said. “Try it,” (e)the happy man urged her. She tasted 
② 
How the Romans Protected Their Properties it. “This coffee is absolutely delicious, too!” Talking and 
③ 
laughing over coffee, they enjoyed the fabulous spring day.
Increasing Demand to Protect Ancient Artifacts
④ 
Why Trademarks Were Exploited in Early Civilizations
⑤ 
(A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
(A) (B) 가장 적절한 것은?
42. 윗글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
①  － － ②  － －
(A) (B)
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③  － － ④  － －
recognize valuable
① …… (D) (C) (B)
⑤  － －
recognize outdated
② ……
honor ignorable
③ …… 44. 밑줄 친 (a)∼(e)  중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
suspend imitable
④ …… 것은?
suspend significant
⑤ …… (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 45. 윗글의 Richard에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
(A)
① 어느 봄날 카페에서 길거리의 사람들을 바라보았다.
Julie
Richard was watching people  on  the  street  through  the  ② 자신과  를 위해 뜨거운 커피를 두 잔 주문했다.
window.  Skirts  were  bouncing  lightly  and  pants  were  ③ 커피와 크림에 대해 웨이터와 대화를 나누었다.
Julie
dancing delightedly in the seasonable weather as the spring  ④ 크림을 넣을지 알아보기 위해  에게 문자를 보냈다.
Julie
breeze chased them playfully. Some seemed excited, walking  ⑤ 가 마실 커피 위에 꽃 모양을 만들었다.
like  racing  cars  between  passersby.  He  had  ordered  two 
black coffees, one for himself and one for his friend, Julie.  *  확인 사항
She  was  running  late,  but  the  service  was  fast.  The  hot 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
coffees were promptly placed in front of (a)him.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
Yes, I think we should.
①
We enjoyed a great party.
② 
I wonder why they cancelled it.
③ 
Yes, we can attend the meeting.
④ 
No, I don’t have time for dinner.
⑤ 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Great. Now I can go on a vacation.
①  7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
Of course. I did everything I could do.
② 
고르시오. 
Thank you. I’ll delete the files right away.
③ 
① 요리책 소개하기 ② 조리사 추천하기
I’m sorry. I’ll finish it as soon as possible.
④ 
③ 요리 수업 신청하기 ④ 조리 기구 준비하기
Don’t apologize. I’m sure you’ll get better soon.
⑤ 
⑤ 요리 웹사이트 알려 주기
8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 변경된 시간에 배드민턴 연습을 할 수 
3. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  없는  이유를 고르시오.
고르시오. 
① 댄스 연습을 해야 해서
①  원예 동아리 가입을 권유하려고 ② 코치를 구할 수 없어서
②  티셔츠 수령 방법을 안내하려고 ③ 체육관이 공사 중이어서
③  채소 재배 방법을 설명하려고 ④ 학교 행사에 참석해야 해서
④  회장 후보 자격을 공지하려고 ⑤ 도서관 아르바이트를 해야 해서
⑤  회비 납부를 요청하려고
9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$300 $360 $450 $500 $540
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오. 10. 대화를 듣고,  학부모 교사 회의에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 
①  독서가 글쓰기에 미치는 영향 않은  것을 고르시오.
②  토론 능력 향상을 위한 방법
①  유인물 복사 ②  컴퓨터 설치 ③  간식 구입
③  일기를 쓸 때의 유의 사항
④  강당 청소 ⑤  현수막 걸기
④  자유 토론 방식의 장점
⑤  잘못된 상식의 위험성 summer camp
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 
고르시오.
①  수영장 시설을 갖추고 있다.
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
②  수학과 과학 프로그램을 제공한다.
5
①  소설가－독자 ②  면접관－구직자 ③  캠프 기간은  일이다.
③  사진작가－패션모델 ④  잡지 기자－영화배우 ④  등록비는 무료이다.
⑤  관광 가이드－여행객 ⑤  온라인 신청만 가능하다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 관람할 영화를  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
고르시오.  [3점]
Movie Information
Title Genre 3D Movie Time Age Limit
Dear Ms. Mattie,
① A Animation × 10:30 a.m. All ages
B Action 11:00 a.m. Over 19
② ○ Thank you very much for offering me the research 
C SF 2:30 p.m. Over 15
③ ○ engineer position at ABC Company. However, after 
④ D Comedy × 5:00 p.m. All ages
a great deal of thought, I have decided not to accept
E Thriller 5:30 p.m. Over 15
⑤ ○
the position. Your company has an excellent reputation
as a research institution and has many aspects that 
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
are  very  attractive  to  me.  Unfortunately,  I  cannot 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
accept your offer because I have decided to pursue 
Woman:
another opportunity. Once again, thank you for your
Okay. I’ll go find another one soon.
①  consideration. 
Never mind. I’ll give you my advice.
②
Very truly yours,
But didn’t you already contact him last year?
③ 
I’m sure you’ll do a great job at the program.
④  Christine Mahoe
Then can you send them to me by text message?
⑤ 
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  ①  입사 제안을 거절하려고
②  계약 조건을 확인하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: ③  업무 조정을 요청하려고
④  입사 시험 결과를 문의하려고
I’d like to publish a book.
① 
⑤  입사 지원 절차를 알아보려고
I’ll deliver them on schedule. 
② 
I’d prefer to get them by mail.
③ 
I’ll be right back and buy them.
④ 
I’ll revise the review right away.
⑤ 
Helen
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이 손님에게 할 말로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Helen:
Don’t worry. I will hold the shirt for you. 19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
① 
②  I’m sorry, but we don’t sell products on credit. Obviously, one of the judgments the public has of us is 
③  You can visit the lost and found for your wallet. whether or not our telephone service is good. Technically, if 
④  I apologize. We don’t have anything in your size. they get their calls through, efficiently and promptly, they 
⑤  Let me show you a different type of shirt instead. get  what  they  want.  That,  however,  is  not  all  they  want. 
They want to have the service rendered to them in a manner 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. that pleases them; they want not only efficiency but courtesy 
and  consideration;  and  they  are  in  a  position  to  get  what 
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
how to become organized they want. They are in the driver’s seat; they are paying the 
① 
the importance of donation bills;  and  an  understanding  of  that  fact  is  a  real  and 
② 
factors that affect personality fundamental basis of public relations. In order, therefore, for 
③ 
why we should collect things a great company to satisfactorily serve the public, it must 
④ 
problems of throwing things away have a philosophy and a method of doing business which 
⑤ 
will  allow  and  insure  that  its  people  serve  the  public 
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌  것은? efficiently and in a pleasing manner. 
papers clock toys
①  ②  ③ 
① 성공적인 기업 경영을 위해 사원 복지 향상에 힘써야 한다.
lamp flower vase
④ ⑤ 
② 효율적이면서 고객을 만족시키는 서비스를 제공해야 한다.
③ 기업 이익의 일정 부분을 사회에 환원해야 한다. 
  이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 
④ 공공 예절을 지키며 휴대 전화를 사용해야 한다.
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 고객의 요구에 맞는 신제품을 개발해야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
20. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
On  the  path  to  excellence,  some  obstacles  may  initially  Recently, researchers have suggested that the purpose of 
seem overwhelming. Every performer experiences this feeling,  laughter is not just to communicate that one is in a playful 
even  the  greatest  performers  in  the  world.  If  you  believe  state,  but  to  actually  induce  this  state  in  others  as  well. 
that the obstacles are too great to overcome, you will prove  According to this view, the peculiar sounds of laughter have 
yourself  right  even  when  you  are  wrong.  Most  seemingly  a  direct  effect  on  the  listener,  inducing  positive  emotional 
impossible obstacles can be overcome by seeing possibilities,  arousal  that  mirrors  the  emotional  state  of  the  laugher, 
focusing  on  what  is  within  your  control,  taking  the  first  perhaps by activating certain specialized brain circuits. In this 
step, and then focusing on the next step and the next step  way, laughter may serve an important biosocial function of 
after  that.  If  your  commitment  becomes  weak,  remember  coupling  together  the  positive  emotions  of  members  of  a 
your  dream  and  why  it  is  important  to  you,  find  simple  group and thereby coordinating their activities. This would 
joys in your daily pursuits, rejoice in the little victories or  explain why laughter is so infectious; when we hear someone 
small  steps  forward,  and  embrace  the  process  of  ongoing  laughing,  it  is  almost  impossible  not  to  feel  cheerful  and 
learning.  With  a  positive  perspective  and  persistence,  you  begin laughing too.
will get through and find a way through all obstacles.
effects of laughter on others
①
benefits of activating brain circuits
① 시작이 좋아야 큰 성공을 거둘 수 있다. ②
② 꿈을 이루기 위해 현실적인 목표를 세워야 한다. ③ strategies for coordinating activities
③ 긍정적 시각과 끈기가 있으면 난관을 극복할 수 있다. negative aspects of emotional reactions
④
④ 갈등을 유발하지 않으려면 감정의 조절이 필요하다. importance of grouping in communication
⑤
⑤ 지속적인 학습을 위해서는 동기부여가 필요하다.
NAS  Bird  Watching  Adventure
23. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 
내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
nAS Bird Watching Adventure
21. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
NAS National Wildlife Refuge, Houston
For many years now, mediated entertainment such as TV  Sunday, July 20, 2014, 8:00 18:00
－
and film has been able to stimulate our optical and auditory  $80 per person
senses with sights and sounds. Some forms of new media, 
however, even engage our senses of touch and smell. The  The  tour  starts  at  the  NAS  Forest  &  Trail 
view the wearer of some special device sees is projected on  Headquarters  at  8:00  am.  Once  we  arrive  at  the 
the  screen  behind  him.  Wearers  become  immersed  in  the  refuge  at  about  10:00  am,  we  will  begin  our 
computerized  scene  and  use  the  gloves  to  pick  up  and  six-hour  hike,  searching  for  birds  and  learning 
about the plants and animals of the refuge.
move  simulated  objects.  Many  virtual  reality  games  and 
rides now allow audiences and players to feel sensations of 
What to expect: The hike covers 3 to 4 miles 
?
motion  and  touch.  New  media  may  also  include  aromas, 
and includes moderately difficult terrain. 
such as Disney’s “Soaring Over California” attraction at the 
What’s  provided: Transportation,  lunch,  and 
California  Adventure  theme  park,  where  audiences  smell  ?
expert guides. 
orange orchards and pine forests while enjoying a simulated 
hang-gliding  experience  across  the  countryside.  Makers  of  What to bring: Comfortable shoes, long pants, 
?
emerging  forms  of  entertainment  will  likely  continue  to  and sunblock.
experiment  with  ways  they  can  simulate  and  manipulate 
For more information, visit www.wls.gov/nasforest.
reality by stimulating our senses.
① TV and Film: Blessing or Curse? ① NAS Forest & Trail Headquarters에서 오전 8시에 시작된다.
How We Operate an Audio System
② ② 야생 생물 보호 구역의 동식물에 관해서 배울 수 있다.
Seeing Is More Important Than Touching 3 4
③ ③ 도보 여행의 거리는  ～   마일이다.
“Soaring Over California,” a Theme Park Adventure
④ ④ 교통편은 제공하지만 점심은 제공하지 않는다.
New Mediated Entertainment: Stimulate More Senses!
⑤ ⑤ 편한 신발,  긴 바지,  자외선 차단제를 가져와야 한다.
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
Swan Lake Tammy Rahr
24. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은? 26. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
During her childhood years, the artist Tammy Rahr spent 
SWAN LAKE
a lot of time outdoors making things from flowers and dirt. 
July 3 (Thu.)- 4 (Fri.), 2014, at the State Theater Then Tammy and her family moved from the woodlands of 
New York State to an urban city outside of Los Angeles, 
Time: Thu. 8:00 pm/Fri. 7:00 pm
California. The experience made her more aware of what was 
Prices: A Seats-$120/B Seats-$90
going on in the world. After returning to New York State 
Running Time: 2 hours
with her family, Tammy faced another lesson in growing up. 
Minimum Age: Children under 7 will not be admitted.
A gifted student, she was sent to college when she was just 
The  ballet  is  performed  to  the  live  music  of  the  14. Tammy was able to earn her high school diploma and 
State Theater Orchestra. some college credit before trying her hand at a number of 
different jobs. Eventually, she moved to Santa Fe, New Mexico, 
20% Early Purchase Discount until May 31
?
and studied at the Institute of American Indian Arts. After 
- To  receive  this  discount,  you  must  purchase  your 
graduating from the institute, she remained active with it and 
tickets from our website at www.statetheater.com.
the museum there.
Phone Reservations: 887-885-7909
?
- Business hours: 09:00 18:00 (7 days a week) ① 어린 시절에 꽃과 흙으로 무언가를 만들면서 많은 시간을 보냈다.
－
New York California
②   주에서  로 이사했다.
Cancellation Policy
? New York
③ 가족과 함께      주로 되돌아갔다.
- On the day of performance: No refund
④ 고등학교 졸업장을 받지 못했다.
- 1 5 days before the performance: 30% cancellation fee
～
Institute of American Indian Arts
⑤ 에서 공부했다.
① 공연 시간은 세 시간 동안이다.
② 녹음된 음악에 맞춰 발레가 공연된다.
5 31
③ 웹사이트에서  월  일까지 티켓을 구매하면 할인 혜택이 있다.
④ 전화 예매는 평일에만 가능하다.
⑤ 공연 당일에 취소해도 환불받을 수 있다.
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점]
In  the  twentieth  century,  advances  in  technology,  from 
refrigeration  to  sophisticated  ovens  to  air  transportation 
that carries fresh ingredients around the world, contributed 
①
The above graph shows the percentage of U.S. advertising 
immeasurably to baking and pastry making. At the beginning 
spending by media and consumer time spent using each type 
of the twenty-first century, the popularity of fine breads and 
of  media  in  2011.  In  the  case  of  TV,  both  advertising 
① pastries  are growing even faster than new chefs can be 
②
spending  and  consumer  time  spent  took  up  the  largest 
trained. Interestingly enough, many of the technological advances 
proportion  with  43%  and  40%,  respectively.  Print 
②
in bread making have sparked a reaction among bakers and 
ranked  second  in  advertising  spending,  whereas  it  ranked 
consumers  alike. They are looking to reclaim some of the 
last in consumer time spent.  Web accounted for the third  ③
③
flavors of old-fashioned breads that  were lost as baking 
largest  proportion  in  both  advertising  spending  and  ④
became more industrialized and baked goods became more 
consumer time spent.  As for the percentage gap between 
④
refined,  standardized,  and some  would  say flavorless. 
advertising  spending  and  consumer  time  spent,  Radio  ― ―
showed  the  smallest  gap.  ⑤The  percentage  gap  between  Bakers are researching methods for ⑤producing the handmade 
advertising spending and consumer time spent was larger in  sourdough  breads  of  the  past,  and  they  are  experimenting 
Web than in Mobile. with specialty flours in their search for flavor.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
(A),  (B),  (C)
28. 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  [30～32] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은?  [3점] 30. The true champion recognizes that excellence often flows 
Although  children  watch  television  at  various  times,  the  most smoothly from , a fact that can get lost in 
programming that they view alone tends to be specifically  these  high-tech  days.  I  used  to  train  with  a  world-class 
aimed at children. In the United States particularly, most of  runner  who  was  constantly  hooking  himself  up  to  pulse 
the advertising during this segment consists of ads for food,  meters and pace keepers. He spent hours collecting data that 
particularly sugared food. During the run-up to Christmas,  he  thought  would  help  him  improve.  In  fact,  a  good  25 
(A) increasing/decreasing numbers of ads concern toys and  percent of his athletic time was devoted to externals other 
games. Such practices are believed to put pressure on parents  than working out. Sports became so complex for him that he 
to  yield  to  what  the  media  have  dubbed  “pester  power.”  forgot how to enjoy himself. Contrast his approach with that 
This has led to calls for legislation to (B) promote/regulate  of the late Abebe Bikila, the Ethiopian who won the 1960 
advertising  in  Europe  and  the  United  States.  Indeed,  the  Olympic Marathon running barefoot. High-tech clothing and 
Swedish government has outlawed television advertising of  digital  watches  were  not  part  of  his  world.  Abebe  Bikila 
products  aimed  at  children  under  12,  and  recently  in  the  simply  ran.  Many  times  in  running,  and  in  other  areas  of 
United States, 50 psychologists (C) rejected/signed a petition  life, less is more. 
[3점]
calling for a ban on the advertising of children’s goods.
talent patience simplicity
①  ②  ③ 
*pester power: 부모에게 떼를 써서 물건을 구매하게 하는 힘 ④  generosity ⑤  confidence
**petition: 탄원(서)
(A) (B) (C)
increasing promote rejected
① …… ……
increasing regulate signed
② …… ……
increasing regulate rejected
③ …… ……
decreasing promote signed
④ …… ……
decreasing regulate signed
⑤ …… ……
31. The  origins  of  contemporary  Western  thought  can  be 
traced back to the golden age of ancient Greece, when Greek 
thinkers  laid  the  foundations  for  modern  Western  politics, 
philosophy, science, and law. Their novel approach was to 
pursue rational inquiry through adversarial discussion: The 
best  way  to  evaluate  one  set  of  ideas,  they  decided,  was 
by .  In  the 
political  sphere,  the  result  was  democracy,  in  which 
supporters of rival policies vied for rhetorical supremacy; in 
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
philosophy, it led to reasoned arguments and dialogues about 
Dave  Butcher,  director  of  training  for  Sea  World  in 
the  nature  of  the  world;  in  science,  it  prompted  the 
Florida, showed me more than I’d imagined possible. His sea 
construction of competing theories to try to explain natural 
lions worked for social rewards as well as fish. Consequently, 
phenomena; in the field of law, the result was the adversarial 
he did not have to keep his sea lions hungry in order to make 
legal system. This approach is the foundation for the modern 
them perform. During and after the day’s performances, 
① Western way of life, in which politics, commerce, science, and 
the sea lions could have all the fish  they wanted. One result 
② law are all rooted in orderly competition.
  [3점]
was  that  they  were  not  irritable,  as  any  hungry  animal 
③
might be. The sea lions were friendly to those humans they  *adversarial: 대립 관계의
**vie: 다투다, 경쟁하다
knew and enjoyed being with  them. I was surprised to see 
④
trainers on their lunch hour sunbathing in a pile with their  ①  forcing it upon the opponents
sea lions. Another result of stopping food deprivation was  ②  pursuing a conventional standard 
that these sea lions grew and grew! In fact,  they became  testing it against another set of ideas
⑤ ③ 
bigger than most trained sea lions in the past, which weren’t  promoting a consensus among supporters
④ 
given enough food. rejecting competing theories without discussion
⑤ 
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
32. I  would  like  to  compare  the  shift  from  analog  to  34. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
digital  film-making  to  the  shift  from  fresco  and  tempera 
Early one night in 1973 in my old and cheap apartment 
to oil painting in the early Renaissance. A painter making 
in Bangor, Maine, I got a phone call from my agent, Bill, 
a fresco has limited time before the paint dries, and once 
who  was  helping  me  publish  my  first  novel.  “Are  you 
it has dried, no further changes to the image are possible. 
sitting  down?”  Bill  asked.  “No,”  I  said.  “Do  I  need  to?” 
Similarly,  a  traditional  filmmaker  has  limited  means  of 
“You  might,”  he  said.  “The  publication  rights  for  your 
modifying  images  once  they  are  recorded  on  film. 
book were sold for four hundred thousand dollars!” I was 
Medieval  tempera  painting  can  be  compared  to  the 
completely speechless. That amount of money was beyond 
practice  of  special  effects  during  the  analog  period  of 
my  wildest  expectations.  I  was  sure  I  hadn’t  heard  him 
cinema.  A  painter  working  with  tempera  could  modify 
right.  I  couldn’t  have.  I  asked,  “Did  you  say  it  went  for 
and  rework  the  image,  but  the  process  was  painstaking 
forty thousand dollars?” Bill said it again as clearly as he 
and  slow.  The  switch  to  oils  greatly  liberated  painters  by 
could,  “Four  hundred  thousand  dollars.  Congratulations, 
allowing  them  to  quickly  create  much  larger  compositions 
Steve.” “Are you sure, Bill?” I said in disbelief. He said he 
as well as to modify them as long as necessary. Similarly,
was.  We  talked  for  another  half  an  hour,  but  I  don’t 
, 
remember a single word of what we said. 
digital  technology  redefines  what  can  be  done  with 
cinema. angry jealous
  [3점] ①  ② 
astonished sympathetic
by equating oil painting with analog film-making ③  ④ 
①
disappointed
by  allowing  a  filmmaker  to  treat  a  film  image  as  an  ⑤ 
②
oil painting
③ with  the  shift  from  oil  painting  styles  to  fresco  ones  [35～36] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
in making films
35. Music  can  convey  the  scope  of  a  film,  effectively 
by  integrating  fresco  painting  techniques  into  the 
④ communicating whether the motion picture is an epic drama 
film-making process
or a story that exists on a more personal scale. Music can 
with  the  introduction  of  tempera  painting  methods  to 
⑤
convey the quality and size of a space.  For example, in 
①
cinematic special effects
Alien and Olivier’s Hamlet, the music serves at times to make 
small  and/or  artificial  spaces  seem  more  grand  and  to 
enhance  the  sense  of  realism.  In  addition,  music  can 
(A) (B) ②
33. 다음 글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
establish a narrative’s placement in time.  Music for motion 
③
When there is a discrepancy between the verbal message 
pictures often serves to authenticate the era or to provide a 
and the nonverbal message, the latter typically weighs more 
sense of nostalgia.  Music has traditionally been classified 
④
in forming a judgment. (A) , a friend might react 
by  musical  instruments.  Examples  of  the  former  would 
⑤
to a plan for dinner with a comment like “that’s good,” but 
include  Amadeus  and  Immortal  Beloved,  while  a  sense  of 
with little vocal enthusiasm and a muted facial expression. 
nostalgia  is  communicated  through  the  music  selected  for 
In  spite  of  the  verbal  comment,  the  lack  of  expressive 
films such as American Graffiti and The Big Chill.
enthusiasm  suggests  that  the  plan  isn’t  viewed  very 
positively.  In  such  a  case,  the  purpose  of  the  positive 
comment might be to avoid a disagreement and support the  36. It  is  difficult  to  appreciate  what  a  temperature  of 
friend, but the lack of a positive expression unintentionally  20,000,000℃ means. ①If the solar surface, not the center, 
leaks  a  more  candid,  negative  reaction  to  the  plan.  Of  were as hot as this, the radiation emitted into space would 
course, the muted expressive display might also be strategic  be so great that the whole Earth would be vaporized within 
and  intentional. (B) ,  the  nonverbal  message  is  a few minutes. ②Indeed, this is just what would happen if 
deliberate, but designed to let the partner know one’s candid  some cosmic giant were to peel off the outer layers of the 
reaction indirectly. It is then the partner’s responsibility to  Sun like skinning an orange, for the tremendously hot inner 
interpret the nonverbal message and make some adjustment  regions  would  then  be  exposed.  It  is  believed  that  the 
③
in the plan. brightness  of  the  Sun  can  be  predicted  theoretically. 
Fortunately,  no  such  circumstance  is  possible,  and  the 
④
(A) (B) outer layers of the Sun provide a sort of blanket that protects 
In addition Instead
① …… us from its inner fires.  Yet in spite of these blanketing 
⑤
② In addition …… However layers, some energy must leak through from the Sun’s center 
③ In contrast …… That is to  its  outer  regions,  and  this  leakage  is  of  just  the  right 
For example However amount  to  compensate  for  the  radiation  emitted  by  the 
④ ……
For example That is surface into surrounding space.
⑤ ……
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
[37～38] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것을  39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 
고르시오. 곳은?
37. But no one, even your child, is exactly like you.
Mom and Dad went to dinner at a nice restaurant. On 
Parents often believe that they are providing help to their 
that  first  night  to  myself,  Dad  entrusted  me  with  his 
children  when  they  constantly  correct  and  criticize  them, 
movie projector and all the reels of film.  assuming that they will grow from these remarks. But ask 
yourself: Do you like being corrected? Do you grow when 
(A) Then I can play the film backward and watch the cat fly 
you  are  constantly  criticized?  ( )  In  truth,  we  tend  to 
①
down to the floor and see all the splashes of ice cream 
stay the same when we are criticized. ( ) We want to 
②
slurp themselves back into the dish. I made Simon jump in 
defend  what  we  have  done,  and  our  innate  stubbornness 
and out several times before I watched the rest of the film.
refuses to permit us to accept the criticism we are receiving. 
( ) Behind virtually all criticism is the sentence “If only 
(B) He said I could do everything myself that night. So I  ③
you  were  more  like  me,  and  living  life  as  I  see  it,  you 
set up the screen at one end of the living room. I turned 
would be a lot better off.” ( ) Praise your children for 
on the projector, turned off the light, put the bowl of  ④
attempting  a  task,  even  if  it  was  unsuccessful,  and  for 
popcorn  in  my  lap,  and  settled  in  to  watch  the  film 
taking  risks. ( ) Create an environment in which your 
labeled HATTIE-1951. ⑤
children know that you are with them in their efforts, rather 
(C) It’s one of my favorites because my third birthday party 
than looking to criticize them.
is on it and I can watch our old cat Simon jump up on 
the dining room table and land in a dish of ice cream. 
(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
slurp:
* 후루룩 소리를 내다 (B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
An ant turns right, left, and moves ahead over a sandy 
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  － － ④  － －
hill. How can we explain the complexity of the path it 
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  － －
chose? We can think up a sophisticated program in the 
ant’s  brain,  but  it  does  not  work.  What  we  have 
overlooked  is  the  ant’s  environment.  The  ant  may  be 
following a simple rule: get out of the sun and back to the 
38.
nest. Complex behavior does not imply complex mental 
strategies.  The  same  holds  for  humans.  The  apparent 
Since group performance in problem solving is superior to 
complexity  of  a  man’s  behavior  over  time  is  largely  a 
even the individual work of the most expert group members, 
reflection of the complexity of the environment in which 
it should not be surprising that students learn better when 
he finds himself. People adapt to their environments much 
they cooperate. However, there is one issue that needs further 
as gelatin does; if you wish to know what form it will 
consideration.
have when it solidifies, study the shape of the mold that 
holds the gelatin. To understand behavior, one has to look 
(A) In addition to that benefit, helping lower-ability students 
at both the mind and the environment.
often pulls higher-ability students to a more sophisticated 
understanding of the material. The cliche that teachers  *gelatin: 젤라틴, 정제한 아교
??
learn as much as their pupils is certainly true.
(B) Not quite. Knowledge, happily, is not a zero-sum product.  Although  we  tend  to (A) complex  behavior  with 
Higher-ability students can reinforce their own knowledge  complex  mental  operations, (B) factors  need  to  be 
considered  as  well  for  a  better  understanding  of  such 
by teaching those with lower ability.
behavior.
(C) Specifically,  the  technique  of  having  students  help  one 
another raises the question of whether students with lower 
(A) (B)
ability  are  being  helped  at  the  expense  of  those  with 
associate genetic
① ……
higher ability. Is this true?
associate environmental
② ……
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) identify psychological
①  － － ②  － － ③ ……
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B) replace psychological
③  － － ④  － － ④ ……
(C) (B) (A) replace environmental
⑤  － － ⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
It was so hard to break out of the box, but (b)I began 
When  someone  asks  us,  “How  does  that  work?”  or 
to feel an urgent need for a change. I signed up for the 
“Why does that happen?” we tend to answer the question 
Army and went to the Vietnam War. A lot of people were 
directly  if  we  know  the  answer.  After  all,  it  is  efficient. 
worried, but I said, “Well, I’m going to get out of my box 
Another person asks a question; we provide the answer to 
by deciding what to do myself instead of having someone 
the  question.  It  is  usually  a  win-win.  The  problem  with 
else tell (c)me what to do.” With that one crucial shift in 
this  is  that  the  direct  approach  can  have  an  unintended 
thinking, my whole attitude changed. I began to dream of 
consequence:  the  loss  of  confidence.  Although  the 
going  to  one  of  the  best  universities  in  the  country  and 
question  wanted  for  an  explanation,  what  the  asker 
playing football. 
received  was  a  statement  of  fact.  Why  does  oil  float  on 
 
top  of  water  in  a  glass?  Relative  density.  What  causes  (C)
climate  change?  Increased  CO   in  the  atmosphere.  Why 
2 I was born into a large poor family in Chicago. As a kid, 
does  the  ocean  have  tides?  The  moon.  Giving  direct, 
I  had  visions  of  being  a  hero a  police  officer  or  an 
―
accurate,  and  factual  answers  may  seem  to  solve  the  astronaut.  However,  people  would  always  tell  me,  “You 
problem  from  the  perspective  of  the  answerer.  But  in  can’t do that. You aren’t smart enough. You aren’t strong 
reality,  it  can  shut  the  asker  down.  A  statement  of  fact  enough.” Moreover, (d)I didn’t do well in school, and I had 
with no other context puts the burden on the asker to take  no hope of getting into any college. After high school, I 
the  next  step.  If  the  asker  isn’t  familiar  with  relative  gave  up  on  my  dream  of  going  to  college  and  got  a 
density or CO , he or she is likely to move on rather than  part-time job instead. I felt like I was living in a box labeled 
2
ask a follow-up question or probe  for  related  ideas.  Any  “This is where you belong.” 
hope of becoming a customer of that idea is lost. This is 
 
(D)
a failure in the form of a lost opportunity. Although direct 
answers  are  often  needed  and  well-placed,  they  do  not  After I finished my time in the Army, I packed my bags 
and went to my dream university. I knocked on the door 
work  universally.  A  skilled  explainer  learns  to  see  the 
of one of the professors’ offices and said, “Please, tell me 
intent  behind  the  question  and  formulate  an  answer  that 
how  to  get  in  here.”  The  professor  could  see  that  I  was 
focuses on understanding instead of .
determined. He said, “I can’t let you in the university, but 
(e)I will see you whenever you need my advice or help.” 
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? It  took  me  a  long  time,  but  I  eventually  got  into  that 
Give Simpler Answers! university, became a football player, and graduated.
①
How Can We Ask Questions Properly?
②
③  Scientific Facts: What the Asker Needs 43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Accurate Answers: A Mirror of Knowledge
④ 가장 적절한 것은?
⑤ Why Is Giving Direct Answers Problematic? ①  (B)－(D)－(C) ②  (C)－(B)－(D)
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③  － － ④  － －
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점] ⑤  (D)－(C)－(B)
efficiency diversity fluency
①  ②  ③ 
(a) (e)
privacy honesty 44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
④  ⑤ 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
45. 위 글의 주인공에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
①  대학에서 풋볼 선수였다.
(A)
②  육군에 입대했다. 
Chicago
It was my last football game as a college player. I made  ③  에서 태어났다.
the  final  tackle  and  we  won.  As  people  chanted  my  ④  고등학교 졸업 직후 대학에 진학했다.
name,  (a)I  was  carried  off  the  field  on  the  shoulders  of  ⑤  입학하고 싶어하는 대학의 교수를 찾아갔다.
my  teammates.  Although  I  wasn’t  a  great  student  or  a 
great football player, I ended up not only graduating from  **   확확인인  사사항항
my  dream  university  but  becoming  a  hero  of  the  team. 
??답답안안지지의의  해해당당란란에에  필필요요한한  내내용용을을  정정확확히히  기기입입((표표기기))했했는는지지  확확인인
People keep asking me how I did it. Here is my story.
하하시시오오..
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
No, thanks. I don’t like pizza.
① 
Right. We can use it anytime.
② 
Yes. You can get it from a store.
③ 
It’s okay. You’ll do better next time.
④ 
Sure. You need to download the app first.
⑤ 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
Good idea. I’ll try it.
①  고르시오. 
Actually, I was too sick.
②  to revise the script of the play
① 
Luckily, I got a high score.
③  to make a poster for the concert
② 
Sorry. But I can’t teach you.
④  to change the design of a costume
③ 
Well, I bought a birthday card.
⑤ to build the stage for the musical 
④ 
to confirm the rehearsal schedule
⑤ 
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 작년에 병원에 입원했던 이유를 고르시오.
고르시오.
①  상한 우유를 마셔서 ②  과식으로 배탈이 나서 
①  직원 채용을 안내하려고
③  독성 식물을 만져서 ④  임상 실험에 참여하려고
②  화산의 위험성을 경고하려고
⑤  건강 검진을 받기 위해서
③  야생 동물 보호를 호소하려고
④  모험 여행 참가자를 모집하려고
⑤  전통 음식의 우수성을 홍보하려고 9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불한 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$140 $180 $200 $252 $280
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오. 10. 대화를 듣고,  슬라이드 자료에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 
것을 고르시오.
①  청소년기 교우 관계의 특성
②  대화 시 언어 선택의 중요성 ①  디자인 ②  글자 크기 ③  음향 효과
③  규칙적인 운동과 건강의 상관관계 ④  사진 ⑤  도표
④  봉사 활동이 청소년에게 미치는 영향
⑤  부모와 십 대 자녀 간의 갈등 해소 방법 Global in Action
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는 
것을 고르시오.
①  비영리 기관이다.
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
②  전직 테니스 선수가 설립했다.
1,000
①  은행원－고객 ②  아파트 주민－경비원  ③  명 이상의 회원이 있다.
③  호텔 지배인－투숙객 ④  항공기 승무원－탑승객 ④  집 짓는 일을 도와준다. 
⑤  편의점 직원－택배 기사 ⑤  재정적 기부를 받지 않는다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 수강할 방과 후 
  이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 
프로그램을 고르시오.
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
①
②
              If you’re one of the countless people 
③
whose  mind  and  body  have  been 
④
overworked, you need a program that 
⑤
will give you a more positive and energetic life: the 
Health  Management  Program  offered  by  the  ABC 
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
Well-Being  Institute.  This  program  lasts  for  six 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
weeks  and  consists  of  three  different  components: 
Woman:
Daily  Targets,  Walking  Plans,  and  Eating  Plans. 
Sorry. I can’t work the night shift.
①  Each week, you’ll be advised by our health experts 
No worries. I’ll go to the music store.
②  and  introduced  to  new  physical  activity  targets.  Are 
Definitely. He’ll move in with me soon. 
③  you  serious  about  improving your life immediately? 
Sure. I’ll tell him not to practice late at night.
④  Then,  you  can  start  by  enrolling  in  our  fantastic 
⑤  That’s okay. He won’t mind playing the guitar. program today.
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
①  스포츠 센터 강사를 모집하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] 
②  건강관리 프로그램을 홍보하려고
Man:
③  걷기 운동의 효과를 강조하려고
①  Don’t worry. I can reserve the seats right away.  ④  스트레스의 위험성을 경고하려고
Too bad. I was hoping you could join us.  ⑤  약물 남용의 부작용을 설명하려고
② 
Well done! Now we can enjoy our trip.
③ 
You’re right. I’d rather take the next flight. 
④ 
Thanks. I had a really good time at the festival.
⑤ 
19. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Minsu Allison
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장 
Everybody  has  moments  of  doubt  about  something  or 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
other  from  time  to  time;  it  is  a  natural  process.  The 
Minsu: Allison,
challenge  is  not  to  let  those  moments  accumulate  and 
I’ll hand in your paper for you. affect your self-belief. You will always face the challenge 
①
I can help you correct the errors. of  other  people’s  comments  and  opinion.  There  are 
②
I can research the Joseon Dynasty. people  that  you  feel  good  being  around  and  others  you 
③
you should watch a historical movie. don’t.  Some  people  give  you  positive  energy  because 
④
you should buy an English dictionary. they  believe  in  you.  You  feel  it  and  you  rise  to  the 
⑤
occasion. Others may always have a negative comment to 
make  about  what  you  are  doing  or  talking  about.  Don’t 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
let  these  comments  rock  your  self-belief.  Always  question 
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점] the  person’s  reason  for  the  comment.  If  it  is  based  on 
tips for a safe hiking trip fact,  you  should  listen;  if  not,  then  it  is  only  their 
① 
advice for traveling at night opinion. You will need to stay strong.
② 
qualifications for a park ranger
③  *rise to the occasion: 위기 상황에서 능력을 발휘하다
finding shelter in the mountains
④ 
arranging group tours in the wild
⑤  ①  인맥이 넓은 사람들과 교제하라.
②  성공하기 위해 도전적인 자세를 가지라.
17. 고려할 사항으로 언급되지 않은  것은? ③  일시적 감정으로 타인을 비판하지 말라. 
weather clothing     food ④  좌절감을 느낄 때는 성공한 경험을 생각하라.
①  ②  ③ 
first aid kit  emergency supplies ⑤  선별적인 의견 수용으로 자기 확신이 흔들리지 않게 하라.
④  ⑤ 
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
Delia
20. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? 23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Delia  stepped  out  of  the  front  door  of  her  house,  and  the 
Traditional  consumption  was  not  particularly  thrifty.  The 
day welcomed her with a warm and sunny smile. With each 
concept  of  thrift  emerged  out  of  a  more  affluent  money 
step,  she  thought,  “I  can’t  wait  for  today’s  class.”  Her 
culture. In traditional societies where resources continued to 
family  had  recently  moved  into  the  neighborhood,  and  the 
be  scarce,  consumption  was  more  seasonally  and 
new  school  year  had  just  begun  at  Elanova  High  School. 
communally  orientated.  In  years  of  bountiful  crops  people 
Her  new  school  offered  ballet  lessons,  and  Delia  eagerly 
ate heartily, and in lean years they starved. People were not 
signed up. She was one step closer to fulfilling her lifelong 
particularly  motivated  to  produce  more  goods  for 
dream  of  becoming  a  ballerina.  Delia  sat  at  the  bench 
stockpiling,  as  there  was  little  incentive  to  do  so  where 
waiting for the school bus. As the bus rolled down Madison 
Avenue,  she  slipped  her  hand  into  her  ballet  bag  to  touch  there was little security from raids. When times were good, 
her new shoes. She thought about working hard on her leaps  celebrations  of  gluttony  were  held  in  the  winter  season 
and jumps. “I want to soar to the moon,” Delia thought. when  stocks  could  not  be  refilled.  These  rituals  were  more 
hopeful bored relaxed important  than  the  potential  hardships  such  celebrations 
①  ②  ③ 
worried scared might later bring, as they served to bind people together and 
④  ⑤ 
distribute resources. Holiday rituals were typically structured 
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? around  cultural  practices  such  as  song,  dance,  theater,  and 
One reason many people keep delaying things they should  feasting, and took a great deal of time away from work.
do is that they fear they will do them wrong or poorly, so  *affluent: 풍부한 
they just don’t do them at all. For example, one of the best  **gluttony: 폭식
ways to write a book is to write it as quickly as possible,   What Motivated Traditional Consumption?
①
getting  your  thoughts  onto  paper  without  regard  to  style.   Communal Production of Winter Foods
②
Then,  you  can  go  back  to  revise  and  polish  your  writing. 
 Refilling Stocks: A Survival Necessity
③
If I only wrote when I knew it would be perfect, I’d still 
How to Survive after a Bad Harvest
④
be  working  on  my  first  book!  Do  you  have  a  hard  time 
 What Constitutes Holiday Rituals?
⑤
relaxing if your house is a mess? Do you beat yourself up 
for  making  mistakes?  I’ve  got  a  simple  message  for  you 
today: It’s time to let go of your perfectionism. It becomes  Stonehenge Tour
24. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
a stumbling block that keeps you stuck.
①  잦은 실수는 큰 실수를 유발한다. STONEHENGE TOUR
②  주변을 정리하는 습관이 중요하다.
    The great and ancient stone circle
             
③  책을 집필하기 위해서는 인내가 필요하다.
of  Stonehenge  is  one  of  the
④  완벽주의는 일을 추진하는 데 방해가 된다.
greatest  wonders  of  the  world.
⑤  타인의 입장에서 생각하는 것이 바람직하다.
Enjoy the stones with a fascinating audio-guided tour, in 
the language of your choice!
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Textiles  and  clothing  have  functions  that  go  beyond  just  Included Highlights
protecting  the  body.  Dress  and  textiles  alike  are  used  as  a  Express Service to Stonehenge by Luxury Bus
?
means  of  nonverbal  communication.  Obvious  examples  Stonehenge Guidebook 
?
would  be  the  use  of  uniforms  to  communicate  a  particular 
Prices & Bus Departures
social  role  and  the  modern  white  wedding  dress  Western 
Adults: ￡44.00  Children(3-12): ￡39.00
cultures  use  to  mark  this  rite  of  passage.  Both  types  of  ?
Seniors(60 and over)/Students: ￡42.00
clothing  communicate  important  information  nonverbally  to 
Days: Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday
the onlooker. The female wearing the white dress is about to  ?
Times & Places: 10:00am, Royal National Hotel
be  married  and  change  her  status  and  role  in  society.  The  ?
11:00am, Victoria Station
person  in  the  uniform  has  some  specialized  function  in 
society, such as police officer, nurse, or soldier. Therefore, it  To  secure  your  seat,  please  arrive  at  least  15  minutes 
can  be  said  that  clothing  visually  communicates  information  prior to departure or book online 24 hours in advance.
about group membership and functions as an identity marker.
audio guide
educational functions of uniforms ①  는 영어로만 제공된다.
① 
②  ways to diversify styles of clothing ②  Stonehenge  안내서는 제공되지 않는다.
gender differences in choosing clothing 60
③  ③  세 이상의 노인들은 무료이다. 
different cultural norms of Western society
④  ④  버스는 오전에만 출발한다.
nonverbal communicative functions of clothing
⑤  ⑤  좌석 확보는 온라인 예약으로만 가능하다.
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
Kids Library Camp living rock cactus
25. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지  27. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
않는  것은? Living  rock  cactus  is  one  of  the  most  peculiar  plants 
found  in  the  desert.  For  most  of  the  year,  it  blends  into 
Kids Library Camp
the  rocky  limestone  soils  of  the  Dead  Horse  Mountains, 
Premont Library
Mariscal  Mountain,  and  the  hills  along  the  Rio  Grande. 
(July 29 & 30, 2015)
You  may  step  on  one  before  you  notice  it.  Spineless  and 
★  A 2-day camp for children aged 6 and over flat  against  the  ground,  it  has  triangular  tubercles  that 
(Children under 6 must be accompanied by an adult.) overlap in a star-shaped pattern. In extremely dry conditions, 
★  Time: 1:00 pm- 6:00 pm, on both days living  rock  cactus  is  almost  invisible:  it  literally  shrinks 
Learn How To: 
★  into  the  surrounding  rocky  soil.  Moisture  is  stored  in  the 
   -use library facilities 
root,  and  during  droughts  the  root  shrinks,  dragging  the 
   -produce online videos
stem  underground.  These  spineless  plants  survive  by 
   -create your own story books
blending  into  their  native  habitat.  As  added  protection, 
Spaces are limited, so advance registration is required. they store foul-tasting, poisonous alkaloids in their bodies.
?
Registrations are accepted only at www.premont.lib.
limestone:
* 석회암
No registration fee tubercle:
? ** 작은 돌기
For further details, contact Ms. Huggon
?
at huggon@premont.lib or (877) 123-4567. ①  사막에서 발견되는 특이한 식물 중 하나이다.
②  삼각형 모양의 작은 돌기를 가지고 있다. 
6 ③  매우 건조한 조건에서는 눈에 거의 보이지 않는다.
①  세 미만의 어린이는 어른을 동반해야 한다.
④  가뭄 기간에는 뿌리가 팽창한다.
②  캠프는 오후에 진행된다.
⑤  독성이 있는 알칼로이드를 체내에 저장한다.
③  도서관 시설의 이용 방법을 배운다.
④  캠프 참가 사전 등록이 필요하다.
⑤  캠프 등록비를 내야 한다.
26. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
(A), (B), (C)
28. 의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 
적절한 것은?  [3점]
The term objectivity is important in measurement because 
of  the  scientific  demand  that  observations  be  subject  to 
public  verification.  A  measurement  system  is  objective  to 
the  extent  that  two  observers (A) evaluate/evaluating the 
same  performance  arrive  at  the  same  (or  very  similar) 
measurements.  For  example,  using  a  tape  measure  to 
determine the distance a javelin (B) threw/was thrown yields 
very  similar  results  regardless  of  who  reads  the  tape.  By 
comparison,  evaluation  of  performances  such  as  diving, 
The  pie  charts  above  show  the  Breakdown  of  Solid 
gymnastics, and figure skating is more subjective  although 
Waste,  particularly  focusing  on  Domestic  Waste,  of  the  ─ 
elaborate scoring rules help make (C) it/them more objective. 
state  of  New  South  Wales,  Australia.  With  regard  to 
①
From the point of view of research in motor behavior, it is 
Total Urban Solid Waste, the percentage of Commercial & 
important  to  use  performances  in  the  laboratory  for  which 
Industrial  is  more  than  twice  as  high  as  that  of 
the scoring can be as objective as possible.
Construction  &  Demolition.  The  Domestic  category 
②
makes up about a third of Total Urban Solid Waste. ③Of  *javelin: 투창
Domestic Waste, Food & Garden accounts for the highest 
(A) (B) (C)
percentage,  while  the  percentage  of  Ferrous  is  the  lowest. 
evaluate threw it
Other  Waste  is  15%  of  Domestic  Waste,  which  is  five  ① …… ……
④
evaluate threw them
times  higher  than  the  percentage  of  Plastics.  Diapers  ② …… ……
⑤
evaluating threw it
and  Glass  each  are  less  than  five  percent  of  Domestic  ③ …… ……
evaluating was thrown them
Waste. ④ …… ……
evaluating was thrown it
*ferrous: 철(쇠)의 ⑤ …… ……
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지  [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
않은  것은?  [3점] 31. Not  all  interesting  discoveries  have  an  obvious 
A  special  feature  of  the  real  estate  rental  market  is  its 
application.  If  you  believe  you  have  something,  but 
tendency  to  undergo  a  severe  and  prolonged  contraction 
you’re  not  sure  what  exactly  it’s  going  to  be  good  for, 
phase, more so than with manufactured products. When the 
don’t  give  up.  Many  innovations  languished  in  labs  for 
supply  of  a  manufactured  product  exceeds  the  demand, 
① years  until  they  were                                         .  Teflon,  an 
 
the  manufacturer  cuts  back  on  output,  and  the  merchant 
extremely  slippery  synthetic  substance  employed  as  a 
reduces  inventory  to  balance  supply  and  demand. 
coating  on  cooking  utensils,  was  invented  in  1938,  but  it 
However,  property  owners  cannot  reduce  the  amount 
② didn’t  coat  its  first  pan  till  1954.  The  Post-it  note  was 
of  space  available  for  rent  in  their  buildings.  Space  that 
built  on  the  back  of  some  not-very-good  glue.  Its 
was  constructed  to  accommodate  business  and  consumer 
inventor  believed  it  might  have  value,  but  it  took  him 
needs  at  the  peak  of  the  cycle  remains,  so  vacancy 
③ five  years  to  find  a  potentially  profitable  use  for  it.  HP 
rates climb and the downward trend becomes more severe. 
had  a  breakthrough  with  a  super-accurate  thermometer 
Rental  rates  generally  do  not  drop  below  a  certain  point, 
that  was  created  in  the  HP  Labs.  Despite  its  accuracy, 
the  maximum  that  must  be  charged  in  order  to  cover 
④ there was no clear use for the device until it was used to 
operating  expenses.  Some  owners  will  take  space  off  the 
measure fluctuations in ocean temperature.
  [3점]
market  rather  than  lose  money  on  it.  A  few,  unable  to 
*languish: 시들해지다
subsidize  the  property,  will  sell  at  distress  prices,  and 
lenders  will  repossess  others.  These  may  then  be  placed  replaced by new ones
① 
on  the  market  at  lower  rental  rates,  further  depressing  matched to a product
⑤ ② 
the market. backed up by a theory
③ 
found to be eco-friendly
*contraction phase: 경기 수축기(후퇴기) ④ 
**distress price: 투매 가격(판매자가 손해를 감수하는 매우 싼 가격) ⑤  tested for their accuracy
32. Empathy  is  a  character  trait  that  we  value  in  ourselves 
and  in  our  friends,  colleagues,  and  the  professionals  who 
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? serve  us.  The  know-how  to  be  empathetic  is  central  to 
Born in Budapest to a family of bankers, von Neumann  practical  wisdom:  unless  we  can  understand  how  others 
was  undeniably  bright.  At  age  eight,  ①he  had  mastered  think and feel, it’s difficult to know the right thing to do. 
calculus.  At  age  twelve,  he  was  reading  works  aimed  at  But empathy has its dark side: too much understanding and 
professional  mathematicians.  But  ②he  also  loved  to  sensitivity,  too  much  seeing  things  from  the  other’s 
invent  mechanical  toys  and  became  a  child  expert  on  perspective, can                                        . 
Byzantine  history.  When  it  was  time  to  go  off  to  Edmund Pellegrino, a scholar of bioethics, explains it like 
university,  he  agreed  to  study  chemical  engineering  as  a  this:  “If  a  physician  identifies  too  closely  as  co-sufferer 
compromise  with  his  father,  who  feared  that  ③his  son  with  the  patient,  she  loses  the  objectivity  essential  to  the 
couldn’t make a living as a mathematician. Von Neumann  most precise assessment of what is wrong, of what can be 
kept  his  bargain  by  enrolling  at  the  University  of  done,  and  of  what  should  be  done  to  meet  those  needs. 
Budapest and promptly leaving for Berlin, where he spent  Excessive  co-suffering  also  impedes  and  may  even 
his  time  doing  mathematics,  and  returning  to  Budapest  at  paralyze the physician into a state of inaction.”
the  end  of  every  semester  to  take  examinations.  He 
*impede: 방해하다
published  ④his  second  mathematics  paper,  in  which  he  block everlasting friendship
① 
gave  the  modern  definition  of  ordinal  numbers,  at  age 
justify doctors’ abuse of power
② 
nineteen.  By  age  twenty-five  he  had  published  ten 
⑤ cloud judgment and paralyze choice
③ 
major papers; by age thirty, nearly three dozen.
lead to a hasty but correct diagnosis
④ 
*calculus: 미적분학 ⑤  decrease doctors’ compassion for patients
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. Bees  have  their  choice  of  flora  according  to  color.  35. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Lord  Avenbury  once  made  an  experiment  to  see  if  the 
We’ve  all  heard  the  phrase  “the  family  that  plays 
color  of  flowers  attracted  bees.  Placing  honey  on  slips  of 
together, stays together.” The  wisdom  in  this  phrase  is 
paper  of  different  shades,  he  found  that  the  insects  which 
that  social  play  builds  ties  between  people  that  are 
visited  them  seemed  to  have  a  marked  preference  for 
lasting and consequential. 
blue,  after  which  came  white,  yellow,  red,  green  and 
orange.  This  finding  should  be  considered  for  our  (A) In  crying  out,  the  danger-spotting  squirrel  draws 
beekeeping  planning.  If  pollination  is  the  prime  attention  to  itself,  which  may  well  attract  the 
consideration  of  taming  bees  and  if  the  crop  is  identified,   predator.  Scientists  used  to  think  that  animals  would 
                                       while  planning.  risk their lives like this only for kin with whom they 
Let  us  consider  beekeeping  near  a  mustard  field.  Mustard  shared common genes. 
gives  tiny  yellow  flowers  full  of  nectar  and  pollen.  For 
(B) This  wisdom  holds  outside  the  human  family  circle 
better  yield  of  mustard  seeds,  pollination  is  necessary. 
as  well.  For  example,  when  one  ground  squirrel  sees 
But  if  there  is  plenty  of  blue-colored  wild  flora  nearby, 
a predator in the distance, it will sound an alarm call 
bees  may  prefer  the  blue  flowers  to  mustard.  Although 
that  alerts  other  squirrels  to  run  for  cover.  It’s  a 
we  shall  get  honey  and  other  products,  the  objective  for 
risky move.
pollination of mustard may be defeated. 
[3점]
(C) New  evidence  suggests,  however,  that  squirrels  also 
*flora: 식물군
sound alarm calls for former playmates, not genetically 
bees’ preference for color should be put aside related.  These  squirrels  developed  a  social  resource 
①
a greater harvest can be expected near blue flora while playing and these buddies will put their lives 
② ―
the quality of honey should be taken into account on the line to save their playmates.
③
④ the abundance of blue flora nearby must be ensured ①  (A)－(C)－(B) ②  (B)－(A)－(C)
⑤ the color of other floras nearby should be considered ③  (B)－(C)－(A) ④  (C)－(A)－(B)
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  － －
34. In  the  mid-1900s,  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  shocked  the 
field  of  economics  when  he  insisted  that  consumers  do  [36～37] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
not  merely  participate  in  the  marketplace,  they  are  also  적절한 곳을 고르시오.
the  product  of  the  systematic  deployment  of  power 
36.
throughout  society.  Within  this  deployment  of  power, 
commercial  media  ensures  that  consumers  adopt  values  The  study  also  revealed  the  commanders  had  given 
and  beliefs  that  match  the  general  requirements  of  the  more  attention  and  praise  to  the  crew  members  for 
economy.  The  individual’s  participation  in  mass  behavior  whom they had the higher expectations. 
patterns  is                                                                     .
   
Self-fulfilling prophecies can have a positive side. ( ) 
Consumers  engage  in  shared  patterns  of  consumption  ①
We  know  that  students  introduced  to  their  teachers  as 
because  they  live  within  an  economic  system  that 
“intellectual  bloomers”  often  do  better  on  achievement 
operates  as  a  belief  system.  It  exercises  considerable 
tests  than  do  their  counterparts  who  lack  such  a  positive 
control  over  the  meaning  and  value  of  things.  When  the 
introduction.  ( )  In  a  study  of  army  tank  crews,  one 
economy  functions  as  a  belief  system,  it  establishes  ②
set  of  tank  commanders  was  told  that  some  members  of 
severe  limits  on  a  consumer’s  free  choice.  As  consumers, 
their  assigned  crews  had  exceptional  abilities  while  others 
our  choices  are  not  entirely  our  own.  Our  beliefs,  values, 
were  only  average.  ( )  In  reality,  the  crew  members 
thoughts,  and  emotions  are  highly  conditioned  to  match  ③
had  been  assigned  randomly  so  that  the  two  test  groups 
the needs of the marketplace. 
[3점]
were  equal  in  ability.  ( )  The  commanders  later 
④
*deployment: 배치 reported  that  the  so-called  “exceptional”  crew  members 
not driven by commercial media’s agenda performed  better  than  the  “average”  ones.  ( )  The 
①  ⑤
a product of unconditioned personal choice self-fulfilling  effects  in  these  cases  strongly  suggest  that 
② 
not a spontaneous reaction to random forces managers  adopt  positive  and  optimistic  approaches  toward 
③ 
others at work.
not affected by the needs of the marketplace
④ 
⑤  an outcome irrelevant to the economic system *bloomer: 재능을 발휘하는 사람
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39. One  of  the  many  strengths  of  the  African  American 
community is an intrinsic support for the athletic endeavors 
But  neither  are  aware  of  this  fact  when  it  comes  to 
of  African  American  girls  and  women. Since  African 
①
unmarked crosswalks. 
American culture appreciates a greater flexibility of gender 
roles  and  accepts  a  broader  range  of  gender-appropriate 
Studies  do  show  that  motorists  are  more  likely  to  yield 
behaviors,  African  American  women  are  not  as  bound  as 
to  pedestrians  in  marked  crosswalks  than  at  unmarked 
white  women  by  gender  role  stereotypes.  Athletics  for 
crosswalks.  But  as  some  researchers  found,  that  does  not  ②
girls and women is not perceived as conflicting with an African 
necessarily make things safer. ( ) When they compared 
①
American female’s gender role.  Hall and Bower’s study 
the  way  pedestrians  crossed  at  both  kinds  of  crosswalks  ③
of African American females found that African American 
on roads with considerable traffic volumes, they found that 
women  defined  themselves  as  “softly  strong” owning 
people  at  unmarked  crosswalks  tended  to  look  both  ways  ―
both  strength  and  femininity  without  conflict.  African 
more  often,  waited  more  often  for  gaps  in  traffic,  and  ④
American males have played an increasingly important role 
crossed the road more quickly. ( ) Researchers suspect 
②
in  global  politics.  Welcome  support  from  the  African 
that  both  drivers  and  pedestrians  are  more  aware  that  ⑤
American community has energized many African American 
drivers  should  yield  to  pedestrians  in  marked  crosswalks. 
girls and women to participate in sports.
( ) Not  knowing  traffic  safety  laws,  it  turns  out,  is 
③
actually a good thing for pedestrians. ( ) Because they 
④
do  not  know  whether  cars  are  supposed  to  stop,  they  act  40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸 (A)와 
more  cautiously.  ( ) Marked  crosswalks,  by  contrast,  (B)
⑤ 에  들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
may  give  pedestrians  an  unrealistic  picture  of  their  own 
Experts have found that reading classical texts benefits 
safety. 
[3점]
the mind by catching the reader’s attention and triggering 
moments of self-reflection. The brain activity of volunteers 
was  monitored  as  they  read  classical  works.  These  same 
texts  were  then  “translated”  into  more  straightforward, 
modern  language  and  again  the  readers’  brains  were 
monitored as they read the words. Scans showed that the 
more  challenging  prose  and  poetry  set  off  far  more 
electrical  activity  in  the  brain  than  the  more  pedestrian 
versions. Scientists were able to study the brain activity as 
it responded to each word and record how it lit up as the 
readers  encountered  unusual  words,  surprising  phrases  or 
[38～39] 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는 문장을 고르시오.
difficult  sentence  structures.  This  lighting  up  lasts  long 
38. Some  researchers  investigated  the  effects  of  different 
enough to shift the brain into a higher gear, encouraging 
media on children’s ability to produce imaginative responses. 
further reading. The research also found that reading the 
In  one  study,  children  in  grades  one  through  four  were 
more challenging version of poetry, in particular, increases 
separated  randomly  into  two  groups  and  presented  with 
activity in the right hemisphere of the brain, helping the 
the  same  fictional  story.  One  group  listened  to  the  story 
readers to reflect on and reevaluate their own experiences 
via  radio,  while  the  other  group  watched  the  story  on  a 
in light of what they have read. The academics said this 
television. Afterward,  all  of  the  children  were  asked 
① meant the classics were more useful than self-help books.
what they thought would happen next in the story. The  ??
②
researchers  rated  children’s  imaginativeness  by  recording 
Original  versions  of  classical  texts  are  helpful  to  readers 
the  novel  elements  (such  as  characters,  setting,  dialogue, 
because  they  contain  (A)   language  that  inspires 
and  feelings)  they  used  in  their  responses. Some 
③
further reading and  (B)  readers’ self-reflection.
novelists  prefer  to  include  as  many  characters  as  possible 
in  their  stories. The  children  who  listened  to  the  radio 
④
(A) (B)
produced more imaginative responses, whereas the children 
challenging distorts
who  watched  the  television  produced  more  words  that  ① ……
demanding activates
repeated  the  original  story. Media  scholars  have  used  ② ……
⑤
comprehensible increases
this study to illustrate the “visualization hypothesis,” which  ③ ……
difficult hinders
states that children’s exposure to ready-made visual images  ④ ……
accessible stimulates
restricts their ability to generate novel images of their own. ⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Because  of  his  injury,  Jim  wasn’t  able  to  play  on  the 
Organisms  must  compete  for  resources  not  only  with 
basketball  team  during  the  rest  of  that  year,  but  the 
members  of  their  own  species,  but  with  members  of 
coach  did  make  him  equipment  manager  so  that  he 
other  species.  When  two  species  use  the  same  resource 
could  come  and  practice.  All  summer  long  in  1997,  each 
and the resource is scarce, the species must compete just 
and  every  night,  (b)he  practiced  making  left-handed 
as  if  they  were  members  of  the  same  population.  One 
baskets. When the next season arrived, Jim was ready to 
of  the  two  species  usually  turns  out  to  be  better  at  the 
competition. If two species eat exactly the  same  food,  for  try out for the team―and he made it again!
example,  one  of  the  two  will  be  better  at  catching  it. 
(C)
Unless  something  interferes,  the  inferior  competitor  loses 
out  and  the  competitively  superior  species  takes  over.  As he came around a sloping curve on his bicycle, Jim 
When one species eliminates another by outcompeting it,  hit  a  car  parked  on  the  side  of  the  road.  (c)He  ended 
it is called competitive exclusion. up  in  the  hospital.  Besides  bad  cuts  on  his  head,  he 
Sometimes  a  competitively  superior  species  is  prevented  broke  his  right  arm  and  was  in  a  cast  for  two  months. 
from  excluding  poorer  competitors.  Periodic  disturbances  Jim’s  doctor  gave  him  a  series  of  tests.  The  doctor 
such  as  severe  storms,  battering  by  drifting  logs,  or 
concluded  that  (d)he  had  suffered  nerve  damage  and 
underwater  landslides  can  reduce  the  population  of  a 
that he might never regain the full use of his right arm.
dominant  competitor  and  give  other  species  a  chance. 
Furthermore,  which  species  is  competitively  superior  (D)
sometimes  depends  on  the  conditions.  On  rocky  shores 
Jim  never  became  a  starter,  but  he  was  always  the 
in  tropical  Hong  Kong,  for  example,  foliose  (leaf-like) 
first  substitute  to  go  in  the  game.  Jim  got  a  chance  to 
algae  are  the  dominant  seaweeds  during  the  relatively 
play  in  the  last  30  seconds  of  the  championship  game 
cool  winter.  In  the  summer  heat,  these  forms  die  out 
when  a  starting  player  sprained  (e)his  ankle.  With  10 
and  are  replaced  by  more  resistant  encrusting  algae. 
seconds  left,  Jim  balanced  the  ball  in  his  left  hand  and 
Seasonal  variation  thus  prevents  either  group  from 
took  the  shot.  The  crowd  was  deathly  quiet  until
―
excluding the other, and there is a   
swish!  He  made  the  three-point-shot  left-handed!  Jim 
between the competing species.
won  not  only  the  game  but  also  the  hearts  of  his 
*encrust: 외피를 형성하다
teammates  for  proving  that  with  determination,  no 
obstacle is too great.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Innate Advantages of the Strong
① 
(A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
How Are the Superior Determined?
② 
가장 적절한 것은?
Population Growth in Marine Life
③ 
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
Why Do Species Avoid Competing? ①  － － ②  － －
④ 
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
Every Aspect of a Species’ Lifestyle ③  － － ④  － －
⑤ 
(D) (C) (B)
⑤  － －
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
(a) (e)
shifting balance fixed hierarchy 44. 밑줄 친  ∼   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
①  ② 
strong dependency lasting collaboration (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
③  ④  ①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
one-way relationship
⑤ 
Jim
45. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Manti
①    고등학교의 뛰어난 운동선수였다.　　　
(A)
②  부상당한 해의 남은 경기에는 선수로 참여하지 못했다.
Jim  Nelson,  a  junior  at  Manti  High  School,  was  an 
③  자전거를 타고 가다가 주차된 차에 부딪쳤다.
outstanding  athlete.  He  had  just  made  the  school  ④  챔피언 결정전에 처음부터 출전했다.
3
basketball  team,  one  of  the  best  in  the  state.  But  on  ⑤  왼손으로  점 슛을 성공시켰다.
October  23,  1996,  most  of  (a)his  athletic  future  was 
suddenly  taken  away  from  him.  Jim  was  riding  his 
*  확인 사항
bicycle  at  night  to  visit  his  friend.  The  road  was  very 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
steep in some places. It was very dark and difficult to see.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2016학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
They’ll be done in an hour.
① 
They were ready yesterday.
② 
Let’s see if they’re my pants.
③ 
I tried, but I couldn’t fix them.
④ 
They’ll go shopping tomorrow.
⑤ 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
I’m glad you love my new menu.
① 
Too many cooks won’t be helpful.
② 
7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
I’ll order more tomatoes for the dinner.
③ 
고르시오.
That’s too bad. The tomatoes aren’t fresh.
④ 
I’m sorry. I’ll call and change the order now. ①  여행 책자 보내기 ②  항공권 예약하기
⑤ 
③  여행 일자 확인하기 ④  호텔 정보 검색하기
⑤  관광 가이드 구하기
3. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지하철을 이용하는 이유를 고르시오.
고르시오.
①  자동차 연료비가 올라서 ②  교통 체증을 피하려고
①  달리기 대회를 홍보하려고
③  자동차가 고장 나서 ④  환경을 보호하려고
②  수질 오염 문제를 알리려고
⑤  운동량을 늘리려고
③  달리기의 장점을 설명하려고
④  강변 공원 개장을 안내하려고
⑤  자선 행사 도우미를 모집하려고 9. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$36 $45 $50 $63 $70
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 10. 대화를 듣고,  현장 학습에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은 
것을 고르시오.
①  놀이는 아동의 학습 동기를 높인다.
②  뮤지컬 관람은 예술적 감수성을 높인다. ①  활동 종류 ②  예약 인원 ③  날짜
③  취미 생활은 스트레스 해소에 유익하다. ④  결제 수단 ⑤  준비 물품
④  뮤지컬 수업은 아동의 자신감을 키워 준다.
⑤  수업 시 아동의 흥미를 고려할 필요가 있다.
Bamboo Pond Restaurant
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치
하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
Beijing
①  중국의  에 위치하고 있다.
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 2
②  건축하는 데  년 이상이 걸렸다.
①  축구 코치－선수 ②  작곡가－지휘자 ③  공연장에서 전통 쇼가 매일 열린다.
③  영화 감독－소설가 ④  사진 작가－영화 배우 ④  아이들이 놀 수 있는 공간이 있다.
200
⑤  상담 교사－학생 ⑤  명의 요리사를 고용하고 있다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택할 수업을  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
고르시오.
Dear Supporter: 
I am writing to ask you to financially support the Marine 
① Biodiversity  Preservation  Campaign.  Global  marine 
② biodiversity is increasingly endangered, and coral reefs 
③ are among the most threatened marine environments on 
④ Earth. This is particularly true for the reefs in the Coral 
⑤ Triangle Region. With your donation, we can preserve 
fragile coral reefs around the world. For more information 
on how to donate, please visit www.marinebio.org/reefs. 
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
Thank you.
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
Sincerely,
Woman:
Braulio Ferreira
Sure. Let’s encourage more students to sign up.
① 
Perfect! Please tell me how I can contact him.
② 
*coral reef: 산호초
Perhaps we should just cancel the contest.
③ 
Unfortunately, I cannot change the topic. ①  산호초 특별 전시회를 홍보하려고
④ 
Terrific! You’ll be the best judge ever. ②  환경 보호 지원 정책을 공모하려고
⑤ 
③  산호초 보호를 위한 기부를 부탁하려고
④  해양 생태계 보호 법률 제정을 촉구하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
⑤  산호초 다양성에 관한 연구 결과를 설명하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
19. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
①  Good for you. You’re going to major in robotics. On my first day in the Emergency Center, I was about to 
②  I’m sorry. I can’t participate in volunteer activities. drink my coffee when the first call came. I quickly picked up 
③  That’s too bad. You really wanted to attend the lecture. the line, “9-1-1.” My voice was trembling and my heart was 
In fact, I already taught what he talked about yesterday. racing.  A  woman  cried,  “My  husband’s  not  breathing!”  I 
④ 
That’s okay. I was happy to help out at the nursing home. instructed her to begin CPR. I was trying to be as steady as I 
⑤ 
could, but I was shaking. The situation was absolutely critical. 
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Jessica가 Brian에게 할 말로 가장  While she was performing CPR, I immediately notified the 
nearby hospital. After a few tense moments, she came back on 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
the line and shouted, “Where’s the ambulance?” I replied, 
Jessica:
“It’s getting there as quickly as it can.”
You can help me run my own blog.
① 
festive urgent romantic
You’re the most competent manager. ①  ②  ③ 
② 
mysterious monotonous
Your blog is helpful to fix the problem. ④  ⑤ 
③ 
You shouldn’t blame your team members.
④ 
⑤  You should focus on your work in the office. 20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Merely having goals clearly defined is not sufficient, for 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. one  must  also  know,  moment  by  moment,  what  precisely 
needs  to  be  done.  For  instance,  a  salesperson’s  aim  is  to 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
conclude  a  sale  profitably.  However,  each  sale  requires  a 
①  교육 매체의 보급 현황 different  approach:  Should  he  be  pushy  or  laid  back, 
②  광고 매체의 유형별 특징 authoritative  or  friendly?  And  what  aspect  of  the  product 
③  멀티미디어 사용의 부작용 should he emphasize? The answers to these questions depend 
④  광고에 나타난 문화적 고정관념 on variables that cannot be predicted in advance. This holds 
⑤  대중 매체에 대한 연령별 선호도
true not only for sales but also for most human activities. One 
must select a particular strategy appropriate to the occasion 
17. 언급된 매체가 아닌  것은?
and follow the chosen course of action. Doing so will ensure 
①  newspapers ②  television ③  magazines more lasting success in reaching one’s goals.
posters Internet
④  ⑤ 
①  비판적 분석에 기반을 두고 목표 설정을 해야 한다.
②  목표 달성을 위해 상황에 맞는 전략을 사용해야 한다.
③  경제 활성화 전략 수립을 위해 시장 조사를 해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
④  성공적인 업무 수행을 위해 작업 환경을 개선해야 한다.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 고객의 신뢰를 얻기 위해 일관된 전략을 사용해야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
There  is  strong  research  evidence  that  children  perform  Effective coaches prioritize. They focus on a single task 
better in mathematics if music is incorporated in it. It has been  instead  of  trying  to  multitask.  They  understand  that 
shown  that  mathematics  is  related  with  music  in  various  multitasking  is  another  way  of  saying  you  are  going  to 
known ways so much that not putting the relationship to good  complete several tasks, none of which are going to be very 
use in and out of school could only be to our disadvantage.  good.  Yuhong  Jiang,  professor  of  psychology  at  Harvard 
Researchers at a Los Angeles school found that 136 second  University, points out that the brain isn’t built to concentrate 
on two things at once. It works more slowly if it tries to. 
year elementary school pupils who learned to play the piano 
Effective coaches focus on those things that need to get done 
and read music improved their numeracy skills. This could be 
and separate out everything else. Separating what’s important 
so  since  learning  music  emphasizes  thinking  in  space  and 
from what’s not important is prioritizing. Ineffective coaches 
time, and when pupils learn rhythm, they are learning ratios, 
fail to put the big tasks first. They either believe they have 
fractions and proportions. Other researchers investigated the 
unlimited  time,  thinking  that  they  will  have  more  time 
ways in which first and third grade teachers could integrate 
tomorrow to get something done, or they underestimate how 
music into their regular math classrooms. They concluded that 
much  time  they  really  do  have.  They  have  no  ability  to 
music-math integrated lessons had positive effects on three 
estimate how long a task will take.
mathematical ability areas of modeling, problem solving and 
application. How Effective Coaches Approach Tasks
① 
Why Psychologists Support Multitasking
② 
*fraction: 분수 New Horizons of Research on Brain Science
③ 
①  음악과 수학은 조기 교육이 필요하다. ④  Prioritizing Leads to Inefficiency in Performance
②  음악보다 수학 교육의 중요성이 강조되고 있다. ⑤  Everything Has Side Effects, But Not Multitasking!
③  음악이 수학적 능력을 향상시키는 데 도움이 된다.
④  수학은 문제 해결 능력에 기본이 되는 학문이다.
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
⑤  수학적 원리를 음악 교육 현장에 반영하는 것이 좋다.
Fruit and Vegetable Consumption
5 or More Times per Day, Canada, 2008
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Do you have the emotional state of mind to become a leader? 
People pay close attention to a leader’s subtle expressions of 
emotion through body language and facial expression. Some 
emotions such as enthusiasm can quickly become contagious. 
Others, such as depression or discouragement, can drag down  The  above  graph  shows  the  percentages  of  fruit  and 
the entire organization. Leaders with positive emotional states  vegetable consumption 5 or more times per day by age group 
and gender in Canada in 2008.  Most notably, in each age 
of mind are like human magnets. People naturally gravitate to  ①
group,  the  percentage  of  female  consumption  of  fruit  and 
them and want to follow them. Such leaders inspire enthusiasm 
vegetables 5 or more times per day was higher than that of 
in their organizations and attract the best people to work for 
males.  Across all age groups, less than 50 percent of males 
them. Conversely, leaders who emit negative emotional states  ②
consumed fruit and vegetables 5 or more times per day. 
of mind, who are irritable and bossy, repel people and have few 
 Among female groups, the 25 to 34 age group showed the 
followers. ③
highest percentage; among male groups, the 12 to 17 age group 
*contagious: 전염성의, 전파하는
did so.  The percentage gap between males and females in 
**repel: 쫓아버리다 ④
fruit and vegetable consumption 5 or more times per day was 
reasons for leaders to hide their emotions
①  smallest in the 12 to 17 age group, and largest in the 18 to 24 
influence of leaders’ emotional states on people
②  age group.  The percentage of female consumption of fruit 
⑤
③  necessity for analyzing leaders’ states of mind and vegetables 5 or more times per day in the 18 to 24 age 
various ways of staying away from bad leaders group was higher than that of the 35 to 44 age group by 0.1 
④ 
ways of strengthening emotional bonds among leaders percentage point.
⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
Richard Porson 11th ANNUAL GRAD CELEBRATION
25. 에  관한  다음  글의  내용과  일치하지  않는  27. 에  관한  다음 
것은? 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Richard  Porson,  one  of  Britain’s  most  notable  classical 
scholars, was born on Christmas in 1759. His talents were 
11th ANNUAL GRAD CELEBRATION
recognized early, and he was sent to Eton College by wealthy 
sponsors  at  15.  Four  years  later,  he  entered  Cambridge 
Graduating students, it’s party time! Come and join 
University. He significantly improved Greek texts and edited 
us. We’ll make the last unforgettable memories of our 
four  plays  written  by  Euripides.  In  1806,  he  was  elected 
high  school  life.  The  celebration  includes  dinner,  a 
Principal Librarian at the newly founded London Institution. 
photo slide show, music performances and dancing. 
During  his  lifetime,  he  collected  a  great  many  books  on 
You can bring up to two friends.
classical literature. Although the number of books he owned 
in total is simply unknown, an episode about his passion for  Time & Date: 7:00 p.m. on May 22
?
books is well-known: he carried so many books that he was  Location: Westhampton High School Gym
?
able to pull book after book out of his pocket when a student  Dress Code: Formal wear
?
tried to show off his knowledge of Greek writers. Despite his  Entrance Fee: $20 per person
?
fame as a classical scholar, he actually published little. On 
This event is hosted by the Student Council. For more 
September 25, 1808, three months before reaching age 49, 
info, see the website: www.westhamptonhs.wsh.org.
Porson died.
1759
①  년 크리스마스에 태어났다.
Euripides 4
②  가 쓴 희곡  편을 편집했다.
①  음악 공연이 포함된다.
③  고전 문학에 관한 수많은 책을 수집했다.
②  친구를 두 명까지 데려올 수 있다.
④  책에 대한 열정과 관련된 일화가 있다.
③  복장 제한이 없다.
⑤  명성에 걸맞게 많은 책을 출판했다. 20
④  입장료는 한 명당  달러이다.
⑤  학생회에서 주최한다.
26. 수영 강사 모집에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
Looking for Swimming Instructors
The  Little  Swimmers  Program  is  now  looking  for 
swimming instructors.
It  is  a  summer  vacation  swimming  program  for 
－
children aged 8-10. 28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점]
－It is a 4-week program beginning on August 1. The  Internet  and  communication  technologies  play  an 
ever-increasing role in the social lives of young people in 
Requirements
developed societies. Adolescents have been quick to immerse 
Over 20 years of age
－
themselves in technology with most  using the Internet to 
①
Previous experience in teaching children
－
communicate.  Young  people  treat  the  mobile  phone  as  an 
Lifeguard and first aid certifications
－
essential necessity of life and often prefer to use text messages 
Applicants should download the application form from  to communicate with their friends. Young people also 
the  website  at  www.littleswimmersclub.com.  After  increasingly  access  social  networking  websites.  As 
②
completing the form, submit it by e-mail at lsp@me.com  technology and the Internet are a familiar resource for young 
no later than July 15. For additional inquiries, please  people, it is logical  what they would seek assistance from 
③
contact us at 123-456-7890 or visit our website. this source. This has been shown by the increase in websites 
that  provide  therapeutic  information  for  young  people.  A 
①  프로그램은 8월 1일부터 5주간 계속된다. number of ‘youth friendly’ mental health websites ④have 
been developed. The information  presented often takes the 
②  지원자의 나이 제한이 없다. ⑤
form of Frequently Asked Questions, fact sheets and suggested 
③  지원자는 어린이를 가르친 경험이 있어야 한다.
links.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  logical  to  provide  online 
④  이메일로 지원서를 제출할 수 없다.
counselling for young people.
⑤  추가 문의는 전화로만 할 수 있다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지  [31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
않은  것은? 31. Early human societies were nomadic, based on hunting and 
An  Egyptian  executive,  after  entertaining  his  Canadian 
gathering, and, in a shifting pattern of life in search of new 
guest, offered him joint partnership in a new business venture. 
sources of food, qualities such as lightness, portability, and 
The Canadian, delighted with the offer, suggested that they 
adaptability were dominant criteria. With the evolution of more 
meet again the next morning with their  respective lawyers to 
① settled rural societies based on agriculture, other characteristics, 
finalize  the  details.  The  Egyptian  never  showed  up.  The 
other traditions of form appropriate to the new patterns of life, 
surprised and disappointed Canadian tried to understand what 
rapidly emerged. It must be emphasized, however, that tradition 
had gone wrong: Did Egyptians  lack punctuality? Was the 
② was  not  static,  but  constantly  subject  to  minute  variations 
Egyptian expecting a counter-offer? Were lawyers unavailable 
appropriate  to  people  and  their  circumstances.  Although 
in Cairo? None of these explanations proved to be correct; 
traditional forms reflected the experience of social groups, 
rather, the problem was  caused by the different meaning 
③ specific manifestations could be adapted in various minute and 
Canadians  and  Egyptians  attach  to  inviting  lawyers.  The 
subtle ways to suit individual users’ needs. A chair could keep 
Canadian regarded the lawyers’  absence as facilitating the 
④ its  basic,  accepted  characteristics  while  still  being  closely 
successful  completion  of  the  negotiation;  the  Egyptian 
shaped in detail to the physique and proportions of a specific 
interpreted it as signaling the Canadian’s mistrust of his 
person.  This  basic  principle  of    allowed  a 
verbal  commitment.  Canadians  often  use  the  impersonal 
constant stream of incremental modifications to be introduced, 
formality  of  a  lawyer’s  services  to  finalize  agreements. 
⑤ which, if demonstrated by experience to be advantageous, could 
Egyptians, by contrast, more frequently depend on the personal 
be integrated back into the mainstream of tradition.
  [3점]
relationship between bargaining partners to accomplish the 
*manifestation: 외적 형태, 표시
same purpose.
**physique: 체격
*punctuality: 시간 엄수 ***incremental: (점진적으로) 증가하는
dedication customization
①  ② 
cooperation generalization
③  ④ 
preservation
⑤ 
32. Investigators as a personality type place a high value on 
science, process, and learning. They excel at research, using 
logic  and  the  information  gained  through  their  senses  to 
conquer complex problems. Nothing thrills them more than a 
“big  find.”  Intellectual,  introspective,  and  exceedingly 
detail-oriented, investigators are happiest when they’re using 
their  brain  power  to  pursue  what  they  deem  as  a  worthy 
him[his] outcome. They  , and they 
30. 밑줄 친  이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
dislike overly structured environments that necessitate a set 
Dad just laughed and walked out of the room still holding 
response  to  challenges.  Investigators  are  not  interested  in 
Slade in his arms. He had dressed him and now he put  him 
① leadership, and developing the interpersonal skills necessary 
in his chair. As Slade sat in his chair eating a biscuit that Dad 
to fuel collaboration is a hurdle for many of them. They may 
had spread with butter and homemade strawberry jam, Mom 
feel insecure in their ability to “keep up” in their fields and 
walked into the kitchen. She took one look at her little boy and 
can react badly when forced to put more important work on 
started laughing;  his little face and hands were covered with 
② hold to complete a task that doesn’t intrigue them.
  [3점]
biscuit and jam. She thought how really cute he was. “Honey, 
what have you done? Look at him. I will never get ③him  *introspective: 자기 성찰적인
clean again. I guess when he gets through eating you can take  **deem: 여기다, 생각하다
④him out and dump him in the bathtub.” Dad laughed. Slade  ①  attempt to go with the flow
giggled and tried to spit biscuit all over Dad. It didn’t hit  ②  prefer to march to their own beat
him because luckily he avoided the spray. That made Mom  dare to take the lead from the front
⑤ ③ 
laugh even more and soon the little cabin was full of love and  tend to work shoulder to shoulder
④ 
laughter. pay more attention to assigned tasks
⑤ 
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. It is easy to find examples of correlations which are far  [35～36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
more systematic than could occur by chance and yet which it  것을 고르시오.
would be absurd to treat as evidence of a direct causal link. For 
35.
instance, there is a high degree of correlation between shoe 
If you walk into a store looking for a new computer and 
size and vocabulary size: people with larger shoe sizes tend to 
the  first  salesperson  you  meet  immediately  points  to  a 
have much larger vocabularies than people with smaller shoe 
group of computers and says, “Any of those are good,” 
sizes. But having larger feet does not cause anyone to gain a 
and then walks away, there is a good chance you will walk 
larger vocabulary; nor does having a large vocabulary cause 
away, too, and with good reason.
your feet to grow. The obvious explanation of the correlation 
is that children tend to have much smaller feet than adults, and,  (A) That is, the reader is the writer’s “customer” and one 
because children acquire their vocabularies gradually as they  whose business or approval is one we need to seek. The 
grow older, it is hardly surprising that, on average, people with  more you know about your reader, the greater the chances 
smaller feet have smaller vocabularies. In other words, foot  you will meet his or her needs and expectations.
size  and  vocabulary  size  can  be  explained  in  terms  of
  (B) Why? You were never asked what you were seeking, how 
  from  infancy 
much you could spend, or if the computer would be used 
to adulthood: a cause which both observed phenomena have in 
for  business  or  pleasure  or  your  child’s  homework 
common.  [3점] assignments.
by-products of language acquisition (C) In brief, the salesperson never considered or asked about 
① 
causal links between uncommon events your needs and preferences. Just as it would come as no 
② 
contrasts between physical and mental growth surprise to learn the salesperson who was indifferent to a 
③ 
potential customer’s needs was soon out of a job, the 
cultural beliefs derived from social interactions
④ 
same holds true for writers who ignore their readers.
features of the process of human development
⑤ 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  － － ④  － －
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  － －
36.
According to one traditional definition, aesthetics is the 
branch of philosophy that deals with beauty, especially 
(A) (B)
34. 다음 글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? beauty in the arts. Examining the pleasing features of the 
Feedback is usually most effective when you offer it at the  Mona  Lisa  or  a  snow-capped  mountain,  for  example, 
earliest opportunity, particularly if your objective is to teach  would come under aesthetics.
someone  a  skill.  (A) ,  if  you  are  teaching  your 
(A) Consider  Picasso’s  Guernica,  a  huge  (11-ft.×25.6-ft.) 
friend how to make your famous egg rolls, you provide a 
painting  in  black,  white,  and  grey  that  he  made  in 
step-by-step commentary as you watch your pupil. If he makes 
response to the slaughter of Spanish civilians by German 
a mistake, you don’t wait until the egg rolls are finished to tell 
and  Italian  warplanes  during  the  Spanish  Civil  War. 
him that he left out the cabbage. He needs immediate feedback 
Images of a cruel war dominate the canvas.
to finish the rest of the sequence successfully. Sometimes, 
(B) That definition seems too narrow, however, since works of 
(B) , if a person is already sensitive and upset about 
art and natural objects may interest us in other ways than by 
something, delaying feedback can be wise. Use your critical 
being beautiful. Instead of evoking admiration of beauty, 
thinking skills to analyze when feedback will do the most 
artists may evoke puzzlement, shock, and even disgust. 
good. Rather than automatically offering immediate correction, 
use the just-in-time approach and provide feedback just before 
(C) This work is widely admired but not for being beautiful. 
the person might make another mistake.
So a better definition of aesthetics would be that it is the 
branch  of  philosophy  that  deals  with  the  ways  things 
(A) (B)
please people in being experienced.
For example however
① ……
② For example …… as a result *slaughter: 대량 학살
In addition in fact
③ …… (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
④ Similarly …… moreover ③  (B)－(C)－(A) ④  (C)－(A)－(B)
Similarly therefore (C) (B) (A)
⑤ …… ⑤  － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
[37～38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장  39. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
Scientific experiments should be designed to show that your 
37. hypothesis  is  wrong  and  should  be  conducted  completely 
objectively  with  no  possible  subjective  influence  on  the 
Analysis  of  the  errors  leads  the  teacher  to  modify  the 
outcome.  Unfortunately  few,  if  any,  scientists  are  truly 
teaching of these procedures, using the language ‘seven  ①
objective  as  they  have  often  decided  long  before  the 
and three more’ rather than ‘seven, count on three’.
experiment is begun what they would like the result to be. 
This  means  that  very  often  bias  is  (unintentionally) 
A 5-year-old doing addition problems by counting on makes  ②
introduced into the experiment, the experimental procedure or 
the same error repeatedly, with responses such as: 7 + 3 = 9, 
the interpretation of results.  It is all too easy to justify to 
6+5=10 and 8+4=11. ( ) The teacher asks the pupil to  ③
①
yourself  why  an  experiment  which  does  not  fit  with  your 
show how these answers were obtained and notices that in 
expectations should be ignored, and why one which provides 
doing the addition of 3 to 7, the pupil counts ‘seven, eight, 
the results you ‘hoped for’ is the right one. It is important 
nine’, while turning up three fingers in turn. ( ) The pupil  ④
②
to  draw  a  meaningful  result  from  the  experiment  on  peer 
is ‘counting on 3 from 7’ but incorrectly starting at 7. ( ) 
③
group activities. This can be partly avoided by conducting 
The teacher recalls similar errors that some pupils made when  ⑤
experiments ‘blinded’ and by asking others to check your data 
doing addition problems by counting on along a number 
or repeat experiments.
line.  ( )  This  is  immediately  effective.  ( )  So  the 
④ ⑤
teacher  reinforces  this  particular  language  pattern  in 
subsequent oral work with the whole class. (A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
Certain species are more crucial to the maintenance of 
their ecosystem than others. Such species, called keystone 
species, are vital in determining the nature and structure of 
the entire ecosystem. The fact that other species depend on 
or are greatly affected by the keystone species is revealed 
when the keystone species is removed. It is in this sense 
that we should draw attention to fig trees. Different species 
of  fig  trees  may  be  keystone  species  in  tropical  rain 
forests. Although figs collectively produce a continuous 
crop of fruits, fruit-eating monkeys, birds, bats, and other 
vertebrates of the forest do not normally consume large 
38.
quantities of figs in their diets. During the time of year 
Still, many believe we will eventually reach a point at 
when  other  fruits  are  less  plentiful,  however,  fig  trees 
which  conflict  with  the  finite  nature  of  resources  is 
become  important  in  sustaining  fruit-eating  vertebrates. 
inevitable.
Should  the  fig  trees  disappear,  most  of  the  fruit-eating 
vertebrates  would  be  eliminated.  Protecting  fig  trees  in 
Can we sustain our standard of living in the same ecological 
such  tropical  rainforest  ecosystems  is  an  important 
space  while  consuming  the  resources  of  that  space?  This 
conservation goal because it increases the likelihood that 
question is particularly relevant since we are living in an era 
monkeys, birds, bats, and other vertebrates will survive.
of skyrocketing fuel costs and humans’ ever-growing carbon 
footprints.  ( )  Some  argue  that  we  are  already  at  a  *fig: 무화과
①
breaking point because we have nearly exhausted the Earth’s  **vertebrate: 척추동물
??
finite  carrying  capacity.  ( )  However,  it’s  possible  that 
②
innovations and cultural changes can expand Earth’s capacity.  As a keystone species in tropical rain forests, fig trees 
( ) We are already seeing this as the world economies are  support fruit-eating animals’ survival when other fruits are
③  
increasingly  looking  at  “green,”  renewable  industries  like  (A) , and thus (B) their ecosystem.
   
solar and hydrogen energy. ( ) That means survival could 
④
ultimately depend on getting the human population below its  (A) (B) (A) (B)
carrying  capacity.  ( )  Otherwise,  without  population  insufficient preserve insufficient create
⑤ ① …… ② ……
control, the demand for resources will eventually exceed an  poisonous purify poisonous reshape
③ …… ④ ……
ecosystem’s ability to provide it. abundant clean
  [3점] ⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
It was held in a seminar room where Anderson met the 
True  understanding  inevitably  requires  a  knowledge  of 
principal for the first time three years ago. The principal 
context. The proper way of understanding a beast in a zoo is 
asked why he chose to work with young children. (b)He 
a telling example. At the zoo, visitors may witness a great 
answered that he loved helping children learn to write their 
beast pacing behind the bars of its cage. They may observe 
names for the first time, finding someone a new friend, and 
and admire the creature, its amazing bone structure, and its 
sharing  in  the  joy  of  reading.  But,  as  time  passed,  his 
magnificent  coat.  However,  no  matter  how  long  visitors 
commitment  and  passion  seemed  to  fade  gradually.  He 
spend in front of that cage, they will never truly understand 
recalled his strong conviction during the interview.
the beast. True understanding can only come from seeing the 
creature in its natural surroundings and, in turn, the ways in  (C)
which its presence affects its environment. 
That’s why Anderson took the job in the first place even 
What is true of the mysterious beast in the zoo is also true 
though some of his friends attempted to persuade him to be a 
of  science.  To  fully  understand  science,  it  must  be 
lawyer or businessman. (c)He shook his head and opened his 
considered within the society in which it functions. Science 
eyes. Ashe struggled to get up, he saw something fall from his 
is not conducted in a  . It is embedded within a  bag. It was a birthday card from his students, decorated with 
social fabric, and just as a flesh-and-blood beast influences  all  kinds  of  odd-shaped  but  colorful  hearts  and  scribbled 
and is influenced by its environment, so too do science and  names. “Dear Mr. Anderson, happy birthday to you. It’s our 
society  mutually  influence  one  another.  Society,  through  surprise gift for you. We love you!” Anderson could not help 
ethical and economic constraints, exerts a powerful influence  but smile. He already felt much better.
on what science accomplishes. At the same time, the results 
(D)
of  science  have  profound,  and  sometimes  unexpected, 
impacts on every human being on earth. Therefore, to make  Today was especially busy and wearying, and Anderson 
sense of science-related issues, it is critical to recognize the  wondered whether he was really suitable for teaching. He was 
bidirectional relationship between science and society. stressed as kids constantly sought (d)his attention. At snack 
time, Emily wanted him to open her milk carton, so he did. As 
*exert: 행사하다, 발휘하다
she was drinking, Scott spilled his milk and Anderson had to 
help (e)him clean it up. Then Jenny, Andrew, Mark, and . . . . 
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? Kids never ceased. However, he still loved them. That’s also 
what he had said in the interview for the position.
Animal Society: A Mirror of Ourselves
① 
A New Perspective for Studying Zoology
② 
③  What Has Science Done for You Recently? 43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Why Does Science Need Critical Thinking? 가장 적절한 것은?
④ 
Understanding Science: Society Does Matter (B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
⑤  ①  － － ②  － －
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③  － － ④  － －
(D) (C) (B)
⑤  － －
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
(a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
vacuum pattern moment
①  ②  ③ 
것은?
community conflict
④  ⑤  (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
Anderson
45. 윗글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
1
①  학년 학생들을 가르친다.
(A)
②  인터뷰 때 가졌던 강한 확신을 떠올렸다.
③  친구들로부터 법률가나 사업가가 되라는 권유를 받았다.
Peter Anderson was exhausted when he finally opened the 
④  가방에서 떨어진 생일 카드는 부모님으로부터 온 것이었다.
front door of his apartment. He teaches first graders, which 
Emily
⑤  간식 시간에  의 우유팩을 열어 주었다.
means he lives in a world of riddles, birthday cakes, and 
pointless stories. (a)His world is dominated by 6-year-olds. 
Throwing  himself  with  his  leather  bag  on  the  long,  *  확인 사항
comfortable sofa, he closed his eyes and reviewed the events 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
of the day. 
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2018학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sure. I like group writing.
①
No thanks. I’m full already.
②
Okay. Let’s go to the cafeteria.
③
Great. Let’s check the grammar now.
④
You’re right. I’d rather work at home.
⑤
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것을 고르시오.
① Great. You really did a good job. ① 음악 파일 확인하기
② Don’t worry. I voted for her, too. ② 졸업생 인터뷰하기
③ Well done. That’s exactly what I meant. ③ 비디오 편집하기
④ Of course, you will. I have no doubt about it. ④ 마이크 점검하기
⑤ What a good idea! It’ll be fun to run together. ⑤ 컴퓨터 가져오기
8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자의 이사를 도와줄 수 없는  이유를 
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  고르시오.
고르시오.
① 회사 야유회에 참석해야 해서
① 학교 오케스트라 연주회를 알리려고 ② 발표 자료를 준비해야 해서
② 공연 연습 일정 변경을 공지하려고 ③ 친구 병문안을 가야 해서
③ 고전 음악 감상법을 소개하려고 ④ 부모님을 방문해야 해서
④ 음악실 사용 규칙을 안내하려고 ⑤ 해외 출장을 가야 해서
⑤ 교내 방송부 부원을 모집하려고
9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.
$36 $45 $50 $63 $70
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
4. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 산책은 창의적 사고에 도움이 된다.
Rainbow Lunch Box
10. 대화를 듣고,  에 관해 언급되지 않은 
② 과학 교육은 분석 능력을 증진시킨다.
것을 고르시오.
③ 달리기는 스트레스 해소에 효과적이다.
④ 학력 신장을 위해서는 체력 관리가 중요하다. ① 판매 장소 ② 종류 ③ 크기
⑤ 우선순위를 정하는 것은 일의 효율을 높인다. ④ 가격 ⑤ 배달 여부
10th Special Lecture
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 않는  것을 고르시오.
Robinson
① 얼음 조각가－호텔 지배인 ①   교수가 강연자이다.
② 메이크업 아티스트－오페라 가수 ② 강연 주제는 야간 빛 공해이다.
10 2 4
③ 의상 디자이너－피겨 스케이팅 선수 ③ 월  일 오후  시에 열릴 것이다.
150
④ 특수 촬영 감독－시나리오 작가 ④ 청중은  명으로 제한된다.
⑤ 동화 작가－출판사 편집장 ⑤ 입장권은 사전 구매가 가능하다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  남자가 주문할 찻주전자를  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
고르시오.
Dear Teachers,
We are pleased to introduce our company’s recently 
launched emergency training program for teachers. Our 
①
CPR class is the most common option for a school. We 
② make it easy for teachers to participate in CPR training at 
③ a time to suit your school’s schedule. Our class offers you 
④ full life-saving expertise that you can then use to deliver 
⑤ vital support in emergencies. With the proper training, 
you will be able to perform CPR quickly and effectively 
and improve a sufferer’s chances of survival. To learn 
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
more about our CPR course offerings, please visit our 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] website at www.thebestCPRedu.com.
Woman:
*CPR(cardiopulmonary resuscitation): 심폐 소생술
Okay. Tell me the address of the store.
①
① 효과적인 긴급 구조 요령을 설명하려고
Wow! That looks better than the original one.
②
② 심폐 소생술 강좌를 교사에게 홍보하려고
Great. Thank you for having it repaired on time.
③ ③ 학교의 긴급 구조 교육 일정을 공지하려고
Terrific! Put my name on the waiting list, please.
④ ④ 심폐 소생술 강좌의 담당 강사를 모집하려고
⑤ Definitely. I want a refund for the vacuum cleaner. ⑤ 심폐 소생술 수강 교사의 만족도를 조사하려고
Lindsay
19. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
A tear rolled down Lindsay’s cheek. She thought she had 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
put her favorite toy, Blue Bunny, in her bag before school this 
Man: morning. She had ‘show and tell’ in class today, and she was 
anxious. Her teacher, Mrs. Cline, might be angry that she had 
I understand. Don’t blame Peter anymore.
① forgotten to bring it. She quickly searched the classroom and 
Perfect. I’ll ask him if he can take your place.
② checked her bag one more time. Her precious Blue Bunny 
③ Thanks a million. The contest was a big success. was  a  gift  from  her  father,  who  worked  overseas.  It  was 
Absolutely. I’ll give you a hand with your speech. nowhere to be found. Just then, Mrs. Cline appeared in the 
④
Awesome. You can take him to the national finals. doorway. “Mrs. Cline!” Lindsay cried. “I can’t find my toy to 
⑤
show in class today. I’m sorry!” Mrs. Cline smiled gently. She 
was holding the toy. “Oh, Mrs. Cline! Thank you. I thought I 
Stephanie David
15. 다음  상황  설명을  듣고,  가  에게  할  말로  had lost Blue Bunny!” Lindsay felt calm and comforted now 
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] that she had her toy again.
Stephanie:
excited confused jealous relaxed
① → ② →
worried relieved pleased stressed
Why don’t you major in art at university? ③ → ④ →
①
joyful upset
I wish I had good presentation skills like you. ⑤ →
②
Would you join me for a visit to an art museum?
③
You should’ve come with me to the museum today. 20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
④
⑤ It’s worth completing your assignments on your own. Once you start to see praise for what it is―and what it 
does these constant little evaluative outbursts from adults 
―
start to produce the same effect as fingernails being dragged 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. down a blackboard. You begin to root for a child to give his 
teachers or parents a taste of their own treacle by turning 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
around to them and saying (in the same saccharine tone of 
ways to update big data voice), “Good praising!” Still, it’s not an easy habit to break. 
①
uses of big data in society It can seem strange, at least at first, to stop praising; it can 
②
feel as though you’re being chilly or withholding something. 
origin and history of big data
③
But that, it soon becomes clear, suggests that we praise more 
pros and cons of big data usage
④ because we need to say it than because children need to hear 
limits of data analysis in business
⑤ it. Whenever that’s true, it’s time to rethink what we’re doing. 
What kids do need is unconditional support, love with no 
strings attached. That’s not just different from praise it’s 
17. 언급된 장소가 아닌  것은? ―
the opposite of praise.
playing fields schools stores
① ② ③ *treacle: 당밀,  달콤한 것
hospitals banks
④ ⑤
① 아이들을 칭찬하는 습관을 그만두어야 한다.
② 아이들의 눈높이에 맞는 조언을 해 주어야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에  ③ 아이들의 행동에 대한 무조건적인 지지를 삼가야 한다.
④ 아이들에게 타인을 칭찬하는 습관을 길러 주어야 한다.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 아이들에게 감정을 솔직하게 표현하는 방법을 가르쳐야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
People sometimes make downward social comparisons When  consumers  lack  adequate  information  to  make 
―
comparing themselves to inferior or worse-off others to feel  informed choices, governments frequently step in to require 
―
better about themselves. This is self-enhancement at work.  that firms provide information. In the United States, we are all 
familiar with the mandatory nutritional information placed on 
But what happens when the only available comparison target 
food products. The Securities and Exchange Commission that 
we  have  is  superior  or  better  off  than  we  are?  Can 
monitors American stock markets forces firms to meet certain 
self-enhancement motives still be served in such situations? 
reporting  requirements  before  their  stock  can  be  listed  on 
Yes, they can, as captured by the self-evaluation maintenance 
exchanges  such  as  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange.  Such 
model.  According  to  this  theory,  we  shift  between  two 
reporting  helps  ensure  that  private  investors  have  reliable 
processes reflection and comparison in a way that lets us 
― ― information  on  which  to  base  their  investment  decisions. 
maintain favorable self-views. In areas that are not especially 
Often, however, these regulations do not work adequately, as 
relevant  to  our  self-definition,  we  engage  in  reflection, 
the Enron scandal in 2001 clearly illustrates. The oil trading 
whereby  we  flatter  ourselves  by  association  with  others’ 
company  Enron  had  cooked  its  books  to  overstate  its 
accomplishments.  Suppose  you  care  very  little  about  your 
profitability in its mandated reports. One outcome of Enron’s 
own athletic skills, but when your friend scores the winning  subsequent  financial  collapse  was  the  introduction  of  new 
goal during a critical soccer match, you beam with pride,  regulations  designed  to  improve  the  reliability  of  the 
experience a boost to your self-esteem, and take delight in  information that companies must provide to the public.
her victory celebrations as if, by association, it were your 
*mandatory: 의무적인  **subsequent: (결과로서)  일어나는
victory too.
Financial Advice for Better Market Profitability
*flatter: 치켜세우다,  아첨하다 ① The Emergence of New Business Opportunities
②
Ethical Stock Investment for Reliable Businesses
① 타인과의 비교를 통해 자신에 대한 객관적 평가를 할 수 있다. ③
Disclosing Truth: The Push for Market Credibility
② 자기 분야와 관련 없는 사람들의 성공도 축하해 줄 필요가 있다. ④
Inflated Figures: The Driving Force for Investment
③ 성취도가 낮은 사람들과의 비교는 자기발전에 도움이 되지 않는다. ⑤
④ 사람들은 성취도가 높은 사람과 자신을 비교하지 않는 경향이 있다.
⑤ 타인의 성취를 자신과 연결하여 긍정적인 자아상을 유지할 수 있다. 24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
Some psychologists believe that insight is the result of a 
restructuring of a problem after a period of non-progress where 
the person is believed to be too focused on past experience and 
get stuck. A new manner to represent the problem is suddenly 
discovered, leading to a different path to a solution heretofore 
unpredicted. It has been claimed that no specific knowledge, or 
experience is required to attain insight in the problem situation. 
The  above  graph  shows  the  number  of  multipurpose 
As a matter of fact, one should break away from experience 
industrial robots per 10,000 employees in 2011 for six selected 
and let the mind wander freely. Nevertheless, experimental 
countries. All of the six countries have more multipurpose 
①
studies  have  shown  that  insight  is  actually  the  result  of  industrial  robots  per  10,000  employees  in  automotive 
ordinary analytical thinking. The restructuring of a problem  industries than in all other industries. Among the countries 
②
can be caused by unsuccessful attempts in solving the problem,  in the graph, Japan has the largest number of multipurpose 
leading to new information being brought in while the person  industrial  robots  per  10,000  employees  in  automotive 
is  thinking.  The  new  information  can  contribute  to  a  industries. While the Republic of Korea has the smallest 
③
completely different perspective in finding a solution, thus  number  of  multipurpose  industrial  robots  per  10,000 
producing the Aha! Experience. employees in automotive industries, it has the largest number 
in  all  other  industries. Both  the  USA  and  the  United 
*heretofore: 지금까지 ④
Kingdom have more than 600 units of multipurpose industrial 
disadvantages of experience in creative thinking
① robots  per  10,000  employees  in  automotive  industries  but 
② significance of analytical thinking in gaining insight have fewer than 200 units in all other industries. ⑤Among the 
contribution of insight in forming a new perspective six countries in the graph, Japan, Italy, and Germany are the 
③
necessity of separating insight from analytical thinking top three countries for the number of multipurpose industrial 
④
difficulty of acquiring in-depth knowledge from experience robots per 10,000 employees in automotive industries.
⑤
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
brown tree snake Best Booth Contest
25. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는 
것은? 것은?
The brown tree snake has a large head with sticking-out 
eyes. The head is distinct from the narrow neck. Its body  －Gold Rose Flower Festival－
Best Booth Contest
usually has a light brown background with a series of darker 
markings or bands on it. The snake is about 38 centimeters 
The Best Booth Contest is one of the main events of 
when it comes out of its egg, and usually reaches 1 to 2 
the  Gold  Rose  Flower  Festival.  Participation  in  the 
meters long. This snake is infamous for causing the extinction 
contest is free of charge, and the best-looking booths will 
of the majority of native bird species in Guam. Shortly after 
be chosen as winners. Please come and join in the fun!
World War  , the brown tree snake was accidentally brought 
Ⅱ
Judging Standards
into  Guam  from  its  native  range  in  the  South  Pacific, 
Use of this year’s “Fantasy” theme 
?
probably as an unwanted passenger on a ship or plane. It is 
Design originality
?
not hunted or eaten by any other animals in Guam and is 
Votes received by visitors
?
therefore at the top of its food chain, which has led the snake 
Prizes
to increase dramatically in number.
First place: $200
?
① 큰 머리와 돌출된 눈을 가지고 있다. Second place: $100
?
② 일반적으로 몸 바탕색은 연한 갈색이다. Third place: $50
?
38
③ 알에서 나올 때 약  센티미터이다.
Contest Schedule
2 Guam
④ 제 차 세계 대전 이전에  으로 우연히 유입되었다.
Judging: October 20 21 (Friday & Saturday) from 
Guam ? －
⑤ 에서 먹이 사슬의 최상위에 있다.
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Award ceremony: October 21 (Saturday) at 5:00 p.m.
?
Contest Registration
To register your booth, please email the festival manager 
at mholden@bbcgrff.org.
Barrow High School Charity Collection Week
26. 에 관한 다음 
① 참가비가 있다.
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
② 심사 기준 중에 디자인 독창성 항목이 있다.
1 2
③ 등 상금은  등 상금의 세 배이다.
Barrow High School Charity Collection Week
10 20 5
④ 시상식은  월  일 금요일 오후  시에 열린다.
Next  week,  we  will  be  holding  our  school  charity  ⑤ 이메일로는 부스 등록을 받지 않는다.
collection to help local students. We welcome donations 
of your gently-used items.
What to donate: 28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?
Clothes, bags, books, and small electronics 
The lack of real, direct experience in and with nature has 
*No cash donations will be accepted.
caused many children to regard the natural world as mere 
How to donate: abstraction, that fantastic, beautifully filmed place  filled 
①
Put all items into a box and write your name on it. with  endangered  rainforests  and  polar  bears  in  peril.  This 
Leave your box at the collection point in our school gym.
overstated, often fictionalized version of nature is no more 
When to donate: real and yet no less real to them than the everyday nature 
― ―
From September 18 to September 22 (during normal  right outside their doors,  waits to be discovered in a child’s 
②
school hours) way, at a child’s pace. Consider the University of Cambridge 
Please try to remember to show your goodwill and  study which found that a group of eight-year-old children was 
support! For more information, contact the school office  able to identify  substantially more characters from animations 
③
at 0093-1234-5678. than  common  wildlife  species.  One  wonders  whether  our 
children’s inherent capacity to recognize, classify, and order 
information about their environment abilities once essential 
―
① 지역 학생들을 돕기 위한 것이다.
to our very survival is slowly devolving to facilitate life in 
―
② 의류,  가방,  책,  소형 전자 기기를 기부받는다.
their increasingly virtualized world. It’s all part of  what 
④ ⑤
③ 현금을 기부받는다.
Robert Pyle first called “the extinction of experience.”
④ 기부할 모든 물품은 상자에 넣어야 한다.
⑤ 9월 18일부터 기부를 받는다. *peril: 위험  **devolve: 퇴화하다
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
(A) (B) (C)
29. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은?  [3점] 31. One unspoken truth about creativity―it isn’t about wild 
Why  does  the  “pure”  acting  of  the  movies  not  seem  talent so much as it is about  . To find a few 
unnatural to the audience, who, after all, are accustomed in  ideas that work, you need to try a lot that don’t. It’s a pure 
real life to people whose expression is more or less indistinct?  numbers  game.  Geniuses  don’t  necessarily  have  a  higher 
Most people’s perception in these matters is not very sharp.  success rate than other creators; they simply do more and 
―
They are not in the habit of observing closely the play of  they do a range of different things. They have more successes 
features of their fellow men either in real life or at the  and more failures. That goes for teams and companies too. 
―
movies. They are (A) disappointed/satisfied with grasping  It’s impossible to generate a lot of good ideas without also 
the meaning of what they see. Thus, they often take in the  generating a lot of bad ideas. The thing about creativity is that 
overemphasized expression of film actors more easily than any  at the outset, you can’t tell which ideas will succeed and 
that is too naturalistic. And as far as lovers of art are concerned,  which will fail. So the only thing you can do is try to fail 
faster so that you can move onto the next idea.
they do not look at the movies for imitations of nature but for 
art. They know that (B) artistic/real representation is always  *at the outset: 처음에
explaining, refining, and making clear the object depicted. 
sensitivity
①
Things that in real life are imperfectly realized, merely hinted 
superiority
②
at, and entangled with other things appear in a work of art 
imagination
③
complete,  entire,  and  (C) free/inseparable from  irrelevant 
productivity
④
matters. This is also true of acting in film.
achievement
⑤
*entangle: 얽히게 하다
(A) (B) (C)
disappointed artistic free
① …… ……
disappointed real free
② …… ……
satisfied artistic inseparable
③ …… ……
satisfied real inseparable
④ …… ……
satisfied artistic free
⑤ …… ……
32. Let me spend a moment on the idea of adjusting to another 
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? person’s mental orientation. What I mean is this. At any moment, 
Most  of  us  probably  parent  the  way  we  were  parented.  a person has a  . The 
Louise, a mother who attended my seminars, shared how  person notices this rather than that, and she has feelings and 
her  mother  dealt  with  sibling  fighting.  Louise  said  her  makes judgements about one rather than another aspect of 
①
mother’s infamous threat was always, “If you kids don’t stop  events. If she is hungry, for example, she may notice that a 
fighting,  I’m going to knock your three heads together!”  shop is selling groceries; her friend may notice only that it sells 
②
newspapers. If she is short of money, she may resent that the 
Louise  and  her  siblings  were  always  puzzled  about  the 
fruit is overpriced; meanwhile her friend may feel tempted by 
specifics of how their mother would actually accomplish such 
some  juicy  peaches.  In  one  sense  the  two  friends  are 
a task, which, thankfully,  she never attempted. But what 
③
experiencing the same shop and its contents, but they are 
drove  her  mother  to  make  this  empty  threat?  Extreme 
having  quite  different  experiences  of  that  shop.  A  more 
annoyance with the sibling arguments, probably. No doubt, 
extreme case arises when one person comprehends things in a 
Louise’s mother had learned this threatening tactic from 
peculiar and individual way, for instance, in mistaking the shop 
her own mother, and, in the absence of any other parenting 
④
for a cinema.
tools she knew of, she said it to her own children, regardless    [3점]
of whether it worked. If Louise had not learned the effective  desire to make better choices
①
parenting skills taught in the seminars,  she would probably  point of view similar to that of others
⑤ ②
be using similarly ineffective threatening techniques with her  personal preference on where to shop
③
own children today! particular take on what is happening
④
*sibling: 형제(의),  자매(의) ⑤ tendency to stick to traditions
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. Externalization  is  the  foundation  from  which  many  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
narrative conversations are built. This requires a particular 
One of the hallmarks of evaluating the quality of a black tea 
shift in the use of language. Often externalizing conversations 
is by assessing how tightly the leaves are rolled. Generally, 
involve tracing the influence of the problem in a child’s life 
higher-graded teas are teas with leaves that are tightly and 
over time and how the problem has disempowered the child 
uniformly rolled.  Lower-graded teas, on the other hand, are 
①
by limiting his ability to see things in a different light. The 
teas with leaves that are loosely and inconsistently rolled. 
counsellor helps the child to change by deconstructing old 
With that said, the tightness of the roll has more to do with 
②
stories and reconstructing preferred stories about himself and 
the steepability of a leaf than it does with the taste of a tea. 
his  life.  To  help  the  child  to  develop  a  new  story,  the 
The rolling of leaves is done by machine or, sometimes, by 
counsellor and child search for times when the problem has  ③
hand  to  break  the  cell  walls  of  the  leaves  and  release 
not influenced the child or the child’s life and focus on the 
essential oils.  Therefore, one should not evaluate the tea’s 
different  ways  the  child  thought,  felt  and  behaved.  These  ④
drinkability or taste merely because its leaves are not tightly 
 help the 
rolled.  It is common to find that people prefer the taste of 
child create a new and preferred story. As a new and preferred  ⑤
looser rolled black teas over more expensive or more highly 
story begins to emerge, it is important to assist the child to 
graded black teas that have been tightly rolled.
hold on to, or stay connected to, the new story.
  [3점]
exceptions to the problem story *hallmark: 특징,  특질  **steepability: (차를)  우려낼 수 있음
①
distances from the alternative story
②
problems that originate from the counsellor
③
efforts to combine old and new experiences
④
methods of linking the child’s stories to another’s
⑤
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
It has been said that eye movements are windows into 
the  mind,  because  where  people  look  reveals  what 
34. The  narratives  that  people  create  to  understand  their  environmental information they are attending to. However, 
landscapes come to be viewed as marketable entities and a  there is more to attention than just moving the eyes to look 
source  of  income  for  residents.  Landscapes  with  a  strong  at objects. 
place identity have an advantage in marketing to tourists, as it 
is  relatively  easy  to  compartmentalize  and  market  their  (A) You  may  have  had  this  experience  if  you  have  been 
narratives.  Such  places  may  have  disadvantages  as  well,  reading  a  book  and  then  suddenly  become  aware  that 
however. If place identity is tied to a particular industry, local  although you were moving your eyes across the page 
residents may feel strongly attached to the definitions of place  and “reading” the words, you had no idea what you had 
that stem from involvement in that industry, and they may  just read.
 in favor of one based 
(B) Even  though  you  were  looking  at  the  words,  you 
on a tourism industry. People rooted in landscape may feel 
apparently were not paying attention. There is a mental 
strong connections to other community members and may 
aspect of attention that involves processing that can 
resent the invasion of outsiders who they believe are different 
occur independently of eye movements.
and challenge their common identity. Finally, local residents 
may feel that this process reduces their identities to mere  (C) We can pay attention to things that are not directly in our 
commercial transactions, and they may believe they sacrifice  line of vision, as evidenced by the basketball player who 
what is unique and special about their place.
  [3점] dribbles down court while paying attention to a teammate 
*entity: 실재  **compartmentalize: 구획하다  ***transaction: 거래 off  to  the  side,  just  before  she  throws  a  perfect  pass 
without looking. We can also look directly at something 
resist losing that identity
①
without paying attention to it.
stop persisting with the old tie
②
tolerate the shift of that industry (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ ① － － ② － －
alienate themselves from that place (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ ③ － － ④ － －
refuse the advantage of that industry (C) (B) (A)
⑤ ⑤ － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.
Today the term artist is used to refer to a broad range of  But it is no light matter to quickly and correctly pen a long 
creative individuals across the globe from both past and  and complicated composition. 
present.  This  rather  general  usage  erroneously  suggests 
There are many instances of rapid work on the part of the 
that the concept or word “artist” existed in original contexts.
great  composers;  and  their  facility  and  quickness  of 
(A) Inventions, ideas, and discoveries have been credited to  composition causes great wonder and admiration. ( ) But 
①
the persons who originated them. This view is also at the  our admiration is often misdirected. ( ② ) When we hear of 
some  of  the  speedy  writing  of  great  works  by  Mozart  or 
core of the definition of an “artist.” Artists are perceived 
Mendelssohn,  we  might  think  that  this  speed  was  of  the 
to establish a strong bond with their art to the point of 
composing power as well as of pen, but, in fact, such was 
combining into one “entity.”
seldom the case. ( ) These great musicians generally did 
③
(B) In contrast to the diversity it is applied to, the meaning of 
their composition mentally without reference to pen or piano, 
this term continues to be mostly based on Western views 
and  simply  postponed  the  unpleasant  manual  labor  of 
and values. Since the fifteenth century, this tradition has 
committing their music to paper until it became absolutely 
been concerned with recognizing individual achievements.
necessary. ( ) Then they got credit for incredible rapidity 
④
of composition. ( ) One has only to copy a piece of music 
(C) Art history has reinforced this oneness: A painting by  ⑤
or to try to put into notes some piece of music previously 
Pablo Picasso is called “a Picasso.” This union between 
memorized, to realize this.
artists and their work has determined the essential qualities    [3점]
of an artist: originality, authorship, and authenticity.
  [3점]
*authenticity: 진정함,  확실성 40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸 (A), 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) (B)
① － － ② － － 에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③ － － ④ － －
The  weakness  of  local  networks  lies  in  their 
(C) (B) (A)
⑤ － －
self-containment, for they lack input as well as outreach. In 
a classic study of urban politics, Herbert Gans found that 
neighborhoods with the highest levels of solidarity often 
were unable to block unfavorable policies and programs for 
lack of ties to possible allies elsewhere in the city. It was for 
this reason that Gans referred to them as “urban villagers.” 
As the opposite of local networks, cosmopolitan networks 
offer little solidarity and have little capacity to comfort and 
sustain members. But members benefit from a constant 
flow of new information and from the great reach of their 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
influence,  even  if  it  tends  to  be  somewhat  lacking  in 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
strength.  Local  networks  tend  to  be  small.  In  contrast, 
38. cosmopolitan  networks  can  be  huge.  Thus,  while  the 
“urban  villagers”  lacked  ties  even  to  their  local  city 
But  the  examination  of  the  accuracy  of  information 
government, cosmopolitan network ties often lead into the 
obtained in this manner is not a simple matter.
White House.
The one area in which the Internet could be considered an  *ally: 동맹국,  협력자
??
aid to thinking is the rapid acquisition of new information. 
( ) But this is more fictional than real. ( ) Yes, the 
① ②
Unlike the “urban villagers,” whose  (A)  ties to the 
simple act of typing a few words into a search engine will 
outside restrict them within their boundaries, cosmopolitan 
virtually instantaneously produce links related to the topic at 
networks  (B) from  exposure  to  new  information 
hand. ( ) What one often gets is no more than abstract 
③ and a more extensive range of relationships.
summaries of lengthy articles. ( ) As a consequence, I 
④
suspect that the number of downloads of any given scientific 
(A) (B)
paper has little relevance to the number of times the entire 
loose profit
① ……
article has been read from beginning to end. ( ⑤ ) My advice  ② loose …… stem
is that if you want to do some serious thinking, then you’d  loose withdraw
③ ……
better disconnect the Internet, phone, and television set and try  close profit
④ ……
spending twenty-four hours in absolute solitude. close stem
⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The nation came to know Ricky as the most complete 
An ecosystem that is altered or damaged in some way will 
player of his generation, and he was voted into the Hall of 
be out of balance with the biome for that area. For example, 
Fame. And his father, the elder Riccardo, what did he think 
if the local biome is forest, but the trees have been removed 
about it? Though he had wanted all of his sons to join the 
from one area, then the ecosystem is out of balance. The 
family business, he was finally proud of Ricky and respected 
natural tendency is for plant species to move into that area, 
his accomplishments. Ricky held onto hope in one of the 
bringing the ecosystem back towards the biome state. The 
most  difficult  moments  of  (b)his  life  and  achieved 
spread of a species into a new area is called colonisation. It 
greatness.
can happen naturally only if there are ecologically healthy 
(C)
ecosystems  nearby  to  provide  plant  seeds.  Once  the 
vegetation has started to recover, insects, birds and other  Since these jobs were not fishing, his father saw no value 
animals will travel into the newly regenerated area. in them. Young Ricky hated fishing. Everything would be 
These  processes  of  ecological  colonisation  can  be  fine if it were not fishing, he thought to himself. Soon, Ricky 
supported by environmental  . For example,  began to follow his older brother who used to play sandlot 
we  are  currently  seeing  important  changes  in  the  way  ball. For Ricky, playing baseball with (c) him was a way to 
agriculture  is  carried  out  in  Britain.  Rather  than  just  forget his hardship. Fortunately, Ricky was very good at it, 
maximising  food  production,  farming  is  becoming  more  and was treated like a hero  among his playmates. When 
environmentally  friendly,  with  the  support  of  financial  Ricky  was  sixteen,  he  decided  to  drop  out  of  school  to 
subsidies. This new approach increases biological diversity  become a baseball player. And by the time he was through 
with baseball, (d)he had become a legend.
by conserving hedges and the wildflowers, insects, birds and 
other  animals  that  live  on  the  land.  A  proportion  of  *sandlot ball: 동네야구
agricultural  land  is  left  completely  uncultivated  so  that 
(D)
species can gradually colonise it. This provides a habitat for 
His  father  saw  this  very  negatively,  because  he  was  a 
a  wider  range  of  species.  Leaving  some  farmland  as 
fisherman. He loved the fishing business. So did all of his 
set-aside is also a way to decrease overall production when 
sons, except for Good-for-Nothing Ricky. The boy did not 
that is economically desirable. Note that set-aside land is 
like being on the boat, and the smell of fish made him sick. 
more permanent than fallow land, which is usually left for 
Instead,  Ricky who  was  not  afraid  of  hard  work
only a year. Colonisation is a slow process, taking place over  ― ―
delivered newspapers, shined shoes, worked in the office, and 
years or even decades.
even repaired nets. (e)His income went to the family. Even 
*biome: 생물군계  **subsidy: 보조(금)    ***fallow: 휴경 so, his father was strongly dissatisfied with him and still 
always said that he was good for nothing.
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A)
Giving Land Back to Nature for Ecological Balance 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
①
Colonisation: Mother Nature’s Shame or Pride? 가장 적절한 것은?
②
Broken Ecosystems: Mankind’s Misconduct (B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
③ ① － － ② － －
Is Set-Aside Land Economically Desirable? (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
④ ③ － － ④ － －
The Paradox of Eco-Friendly Farming (D) (C) (B)
⑤ ⑤ － －
(a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ∼   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
것은?
assessment competition constancy
① ② ③
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
forces management ① ② ③ ④ ⑤
④ ⑤
Ricky
45. 윗글의  에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Riccardo
① 아버지의 이름을 따서  라고 이름 지어졌다.
(A)
② 야구 선수로 성공했지만 아버지가 자랑스러워하지 않았다.
An important lesson to remember is that we should try to  ③ 야구 선수가 되기 위해 학교를 그만두기로 결심했다.
see  the  positives  in  life  even  while  we  are  stuck  in  the  ④ 아버지의 직업이 어부였다.
middle of trouble. Riccardo, who was named after his father,  ⑤ 힘든 일을 두려워하지 않았다.
an immigrant from Mexico, learned this lesson at a young 
age. Although the family called him Ricky, his father had his 
own  nickname  for  him:  Good-for-Nothing.  Why  did  the  *  확인 사항
elder  Riccardo  call  (a)him  that?  Because  Ricky  hated 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
fishing.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2016학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
제 3 교시
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.   
Yes, I’ll buy that raincoat.
① 
No. I’ll bring her an umbrella.
② 
Wow. The weather is so clear.
③ 
Good. We should come home early.
④ 
I agree. Let’s go and eat out tonight.
⑤ 
7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
고르시오.
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
to contact a band
① 
Good. I’ll take the class. 
① 
to reserve a restaurant
② 
Sure. I’ll bring my textbook.
② 
to pick up a wedding dress
③ 
Okay. You can leave a message. 
③ 
to send out invitations
④ 
You’re right. The meeting was successful.  
④ 
to make a cake
⑤ 
That’s true. But I thought it was tomorrow.
⑤ 
8. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 변경된 날에 역사 유적지 탐방을 갈 수 
없는  이유를 고르시오.
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
①  가족 여행을 가야 해서 
고르시오. 
②  지리 숙제를 해야 해서
①  동물 꼬리의 다양한 기능 ③  뮤지컬 예행연습이 있어서
②  희귀 동물 보호의 필요성 ④  할머니 생신 잔치에 참석해야 해서
③  동물들의 다양한 의사소통 방법 ⑤  수해 복구 봉사 활동에 참여해야 해서
④  곤충류 날개와 조류 날개의 차이점
⑤  날개의 기능과 꼬리 기능의 유사성
9. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$63 $72 $90 $99 $110
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  Blood Donor Day
10. 대화를 듣고,  에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 
①  독서는 학업 성적을 향상시킨다.  않은  것을 고르시오.
②  글쓰기는 정서 발달을 촉진한다.
①  날짜 ②  슬로건 ③  장소
③  토론 수업은 말하기 능력을 신장시킨다. 
④  참여 자격 ⑤  증정품
④  올바른 독서 습관은 유년기에 형성된다.       
⑤  문학 작품 읽기는 상상력 향상에 도움이 된다.
Art Museum Fair
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는 
것을 고르시오.
1995
①  년에 시작되었다. 
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
②  지역 예술가를 후원하는 행사이다. 
①  가수－매니저 ②  작가－출판사 직원 ③  매년 가을에 개최된다.   
20
③  영화감독－기자 ④  관광객－관광 가이드 ④  입장료는  달러이다. 
⑤  출연자－연출가 ⑤  민속춤 공연을 포함한다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 구입할 냉장고를  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
고르시오.
Dear Mr. Johnson,
Refrigerators on Sale
I would like to thank you for approving my request that 
Storage Warranty
Model Price Type
(liters) (years) the company pay for my college tuition. Today, Human 
A $1,100 850 Four-door 3   Resources informed me that you had signed my request for 
①
B $900 750 Four-door 2  payment. I want to tell you that this financial relief will 
②
C $800 650 Four-door 3  make a great difference in my life. Now, I can focus more 
③
D $700 650 Two-door 3   on my job. This will enable me to perform better at my 
④
work and contribute more to the company. Once again, I 
E $500 450 Two-door 2  
⑤
appreciate your support of my tuition and your faith in me.
Sincerely,
13. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
Warwick Smith
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
*Human Resources: 인사 부서
Yes. It’s very time-consuming, but it’s worth it. 
① 
①  학비 지원 승인에 감사하려고
I’m sorry that I didn’t clean up my room yet. 
② 
②  대학 입학 추천서를 부탁하려고
That’s why I parked my car in the garage. 
③  ③  장학금 신청 자격을 문의하려고
Yeah. A garage sale can save your time.
④  ④  급여 인상 계획 승인을 요청하려고
I didn’t get my newspaper today, either.
⑤  ⑤  업무 효율성 향상 방안을 제안하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  19. 다음 글에 드러난 Gabby의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은? 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] Stepping up to the microphone, Gabby could feel the sweat 
Woman:
starting to run down her face and neck. She tried to take a deep 
You sing the songs beautifully.  breath, but couldn’t. As her name was called, Gabby became 
① 
more afraid of speaking before a large audience. Then, she 
I’ll give you my phone number.
② 
suddenly remembered the words of a woman who had gradually 
Just thinking of it makes me happy. 
③ 
overcome the same fear: “Fear, rapid heartbeat, quick breathing, 
I’m sorry to hear that you’re leaving.  
④ 
and sweating are simply the body’s declaration that we are ready 
Let’s go and get our tickets refunded.
⑤  to fight.” Recalling this, Gabby calmed down and remembered 
clearly what she had to say. Assured, Gabby smiled and started 
Matilda Tony
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장  to deliver her speech. The words flowed out like water, and 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점] her beating heart gave her more and more mental strength. 
Matilda: Tony,    The performance was successful. She had overcome her fear.
swimming is a popular sport. hopeful scared indifferent refreshed
①  ① → ② →
②  your temperature isn’t that high. ③ jealous → delighted ④ anxious → confused
worried confident
teamwork will win the competition. ⑤ →
③ 
you should get ready for practice now.
④ 
⑤  the most important thing is your health. 20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Planning involves only the half of your brain that controls 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. your logical thinking. The other intuitive half of your brain 
is left out of this planning process. If you insist on always 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
having a plan, you cut yourself off from your intuitive self 
①  홍보 자료 제작 협조를 요청하려고 and the inner joy it provides. To break planning addiction, 
②  전공 체험 프로그램을 안내하려고 allow yourself one freedom. Decide to spend a day exploring 
③  대학 내 편의 시설을 소개하려고 a park or a neighborhood with curiosity as your only guide. 
④  수강 신청 방법을 설명하려고 The next time you feel attracted to someone, and want to 
⑤  입학 지원 자격을 알려주려고 introduce yourself, go ahead. You’ll be likely to make a new 
friend. By giving yourself freedom to follow your intuition, 
17. 언급된 학과가 아닌  것은? you develop your sensitivity to your inner voice. You learn to 
hear the quiet messages that can make your life an adventure.
Economics Biology Sociology
①  ②  ③   
Chemistry Architecture
④  ⑤  ①  내면의 즐거움을 얻기 위해 친구를 많이 사귀어라.
②  학습 계획을 수립할 때는 시간 배분을 적절히 해라. 
③  사고력 향상을 위해 가능한 한 산책 시간을 늘려라.
  이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 
④  새로운 모험을 시작하기 전에 주변 사람들과 상의해라. 
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 계획 수립에 얽매이지만 말고 때로는 직관에 따라 행동해라.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
[21～22] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
21. Although  the  Internet  seems  truly  global  these  days,  Tourism  is  important  for  more  than  just  vacationing. 
less  than  half  of  the  world’s  population  has  access  to  Tourism  allows  people  from  different  places  and  cultures 
it.  Some  four  billion  people  are  still  unconnected.  This  to  come  together,  and  then  tourists  and  host  communities 
spring,  IT  engineers  will  begin  to  shift  to  the  next  phase  learn  about  each  other’s  differences  and  similarities.  They 
in  a  grand  plan  to  bring  the  Internet  to  everyone.  Their  also  learn  new  tastes  and  ways  of  thinking,  which  may 
goal  is  to  establish  a  network  of  high-altitude  balloons  lead  to  a  better  understanding  between  hosts  and  tourists. 
that  will  rain  4G  LTE  signals  down  to  anyone  with  a  Another  positive  effect  of  tourism  is  the  aid  it  provides 
4G  device.  Regional  telecom  companies  will  transmit  the  for  the  survival  of  a  society’s  culture,  especially  the 
signals  to  the  balloons,  and  then  each  balloon  will  relay  culture’s art forms. The opportunity to sell native artworks 
the  signals  to  a  ground  area  many  miles  in  diameter.  In  to tourists or perform folk dances for them may encourage 
this  way,  farmers  in  remote  areas  will  be  able  to  access  local artists to preserve traditional art forms. For example, 
weather  data,  and  rural  children  will  be  able  to  pursue  Fijians  have  developed  their  palm  mat  and  shell  jewelry 
online  educations.  By  the  end  of  the  year,  the  engineers  crafts  into  profitable  tourist  businesses.  They  also  earn 
aim to have 100 balloons about 13 miles up. additional  income  by  performing  folk  dances  and  fire 
walking.
*altitude: 높이, 고도
misunderstandings between hosts and tourists
①
Balloons for Weather Forecasting
① 
various ways of creating tourism products 
② 
Balloons to Connect the World
② 
negative effects of cultural exchanges
③
A One-Day Tour in a Balloon
③ 
disappearance of traditional cultures
④ 
Online Education for Farmers
④ 
cultural benefits of tourism
⑤
4G: The Fastest Connection
⑤ 
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Distribution of Time Spent per Shopping App Category
22. Inflation  can  be  a  major  life  concern  for  most  people. 
It makes it difficult for households to plan ahead. This is 
because  ‘future  problems’  concerning  inflation  often  make 
us  change  our  plans  for  the  future.  For  instance,  how 
much  should  the  parents  of  a  newborn  start  regularly 
saving  to  pay  for  her  college  education?  If  inflation 
averages two percent, prices roughly double every thirty-six 
The above graph shows the distribution of time spent by 
years.  But  if  inflation  gets  up  to  eight  percent,  prices 
consumers  using  shopping  apps  across  various  shopping 
roughly  double  every  nine  years.  A  Harvard  education 
app categories in December 2011 and December 2012.  Of 
①
that currently costs $100,000 may therefore end up costing 
the six categories, Retailer apps saw the greatest increase in 
half  a  million  dollars  for  an  infant  born  today.  Millions 
the  share  of  time  spent,  from  15%  in  December  2011  to 
of  workers  who  retired  with  pensions  during  the  1960s 
27% in December 2012.  On the other hand, the share of 
②
and 1970s found that inflation pushed up costs far beyond 
time  spent  with  Online  Marketplace  apps  decreased  from 
their expected expenses. Many had to reenter the workforce 
25% in December 2011 to 20% in December 2012.  The 
③
just to make ends meet.
Purchase  Assistant  app  share  decreased  by  one  percentage 
①  What Causes Inflation?  point from December 2011 to December 2012. ④The share 
②  Inflation Affects Future Plans of Price Comparison apps in December 2011 was the same 
Various Ways to Reduce the Inflation Rate as that in December 2012.  Daily Deal apps showed the 
③  ⑤
Actual Benefits Exceed Estimated Expenses smallest  share  of  time  spent  in  both  December  2011  and  
④ 
How Quickly Can the Inflation Rate Climb? December 2012.
⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
Julius  Eugene Farm Tour
25. 교황  Ⅱ의 무덤에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지  27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
않는  것은?  않는  것은?
The project of creating the tomb of Pope Julius  was 
Ⅱ 
originally  given  to  Michelangelo  in  1505,  but  the  tomb  Eugene Farm Tour
was  not  completed  until  1545.  It  was  designed  by 
Are  you  looking  for  somewhere  special  to  go  for  the 
Michelangelo  himself  as  the  pope  requested.  The  design 
weekend? Come and visit Eugene Farm, and enjoy our 
called  for  some  40  statues,  and  the  tomb  was  to  be  a 
beautiful fields, barns, and cheese shop. 
giant structure. Just less than a year after the initial work 
on  the  tomb  began,  it  stopped  because  of  lack  of  funds. 
Tour Schedule
When Pope Julius  died in 1513, he left money for the 
Ⅱ  The  tour  will  run  from  10:00  a.m.  to  4:00  p.m., 
?
completion  of  his  tomb,  so  Michelangelo  started  work 
Sunday, June 14, 2015.
again.  After  some  years  of  carving,  he  completed  Moses, 
  - Morning: See a wide variety of crops and animals.
one  of  the  most  famous  statues  of  the  tomb.  However, 
  - Lunch(12:30 p.m. 1:30 p.m.): Everything we serve 
―
the next pope, Leo X, had little interest in continuing the 
is grown on our farm!
project.  As  time  went  on,  its  scale  was  reduced,  and  the 
  - Afternoon: Visit our cheese shop, and you  can  learn 
project for the tomb was revised again and again.
how to make cheese!
Michelangelo
①  가 디자인했다. Admission Fee(lunch included)
②  자금 부족으로 작업이 중단된 적이 있다. $30 for 11 & older
?
Moses
③  는 무덤의 가장 유명한 조각상 중 하나이다.  $20 for children aged 3 to 10
?
Leo X
④  교황  는 프로젝트를 지속하는 것에 관심이 많았다.  Free for 2 & under
?
⑤  프로젝트는 여러 차례 수정되었다.
Reservation
Reservations  are  required,  and  must  be  made  on 
?
2015 National Essay Contest our  website(www.eugenefarm.com)  by  6:00  p.m., 
26. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
Thursday, June 11, 2015.
일치하는 것은?
2015 National Essay Contest 10 4
①  오전  시부터 오후  시까지 진행된다.
The  Evergreen  Foundation  is  excited  to  call  for  ②  오후에 치즈 만드는 법을 배울 수 있다.
submissions for the 2015 National Essay Contest! This  ③  입장료에는 점심 값이 포함되어 있다.
contest is designed to encourage high school students to  ④  2세 이하는 무료로 입장할 수 있다.
become more aware of the importance of our environment.
⑤  예약을 하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다.
Contest Theme
How can we preserve our forests? 28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점]
?
Requirements & Submission Guidelines An  independent  artist  is  probably  the  one  ①who  lives 
High school students only  closest  to  an  unbounded  creative  situation.  Many  artists 
?
Only one essay per student  have  considerable  freedom  from  external  requirements 
?
Essays must be between 1,500 and 2,000 words. about what to do, how to do it, when to do it, and why. 
?
?Due by July 15, 2015  At  the  same  time,  however,  we  know  that  artists  usually 
limit  themselves  quite  forcefully  by  choice  of  material 
We  will  announce  the  winners  of  this  year’s  contest  ②
on August 15, 2015. and  form  of  expression.  To  make  the  choice  to  express  a 
feeling  by  carving  a  specific  form  from  a  rock,  without 
Only essays submitted by email will be accepted.
the  use  of  high  technology  or  colors,  restricting  the 
③
(email: 2015essay@evergreeners.org)
artist  significantly.  Such  choices  are  not  made  to  limit 
For more information, visit www.evergreeners.org.
creativity, but rather to cultivate  it. When everything is 
④
possible, creativity has no tension. Creativity is strange in 
that  it  finds  its  way  in  any  kind  of  situation,  no  matter 
①  주제가 정해져 있지 않다.
how  restricted,  just  as  the  same  amount  of  water  flows 
②  대학생을 대상으로 한다.
1 1 faster  and  stronger  through  a  narrow  strait  than  across 
③  인당  편의 에세이만 제출할 수 있다. ⑤
2015 7 15 the open sea.
④  수상자는  년  월  일에 발표된다. 
⑤  에세이는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다. *strait: 해협
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
(A),  (B),  (C)
29. 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  [31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은?  [3점] 31. In  an  increasingly  globalized  world,  literature  in 
The  desert  locust  lives  in  two  remarkably  different  translation  has  an  especially  important  role.  Increasingly, 
styles  depending  on  the  availability  of  food  sources  and  writers,  readers,  and  publishers  are  turning  to  literature  as 
the  density  of  the  local  locust  population.  When  food  is  a  bridge  between  cultures,  particularly  Western  and  Arab 
scarce,  as  it  usually  is  in  their  native  desert  habitat,  societies.  This  growing  interest  is,  in  turn,  driving  a 
locusts  are  born  with  coloring  designed  for  camouflage  boom  in  translation.  However,  not  surprisingly  perhaps, 
and  lead (A) solitary/social  lives.  But  when  rare  periods  most  translations  are  from  English  into  other  languages, 
of  significant  rain  produce  major  vegetation  growth,  not  from  another  language,  such  as  Arabic,  into  English. 
everything  changes.  At  first,  the  locusts  continue  to  be  Hence,  the  huge  American  market  is  seen  as  driving  the  
loners,  just  feasting  off  the (B) insufficient/abundant            . Bookstores in the United States, for example, 
food  supply.  But  as  the  extra  vegetation  starts  to  die  rarely  stock  more  than  Nobel  Prize  winner  Naguib 
off,  the  locusts  find  themselves  crowded  together.  Mahfouz’s  Cairo  Trilogy,  a  masterful,  realistic  account  of 
Suddenly,  baby  locusts  are  born  with  bright  colors  and  a  life  in  Cairo  and  of  a  merchant  family  in  the  mid-20th 
preference  for  company.  Instead  of  avoiding  one  another  century.  Western  readers  likely  know  little  of  Mahfouz’s 
and  hiding  from  predators  through  camouflage  and  more  experimental  work,  his  political  and  religious 
inactivity,  these  locusts  gather  in  vast  groups,  feed  allegories,  or  his  historical  dramas.  The  result  is  a  kind 
together,  and (C) overwhelm/overestimate  their  predators  of  one-way  mirror  between  America  and  the  rest  of  the 
simply through numbers. world.
  [3점]
*camouflage: 위장 *allegory: 우화, 풍자
(A) (B) (C)
equality diversity interaction
①  ②  ③ 
solitary insufficient overwhelm
① …… …… imbalance uncertainty
④  ⑤ 
solitary abundant overwhelm
② …… ……
solitary insufficient overestimate
③ …… ……
social abundant overwhelm
④ …… ……
social insufficient overestimate
⑤ …… ……
32. We  tend  to  assume  that  the  way  to  get  more  time  is 
to  speed  up.  But  speeding  up  can  actually  slow  us  down. 
Anyone  who  has  ever  rushed  out  of  the  house  only  to 
realize  that  their  keys  and  wallet  are  sitting  on  the 
30. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
kitchen table knows this only too well. And it’s not just our 
Ellie walked to school in her new shoes. “I like those,” 
efficiency  that  is  reduced.  The  quality  of  the  experience 
Megan  whispered.  “Cool.”  Ellie  felt  happy.  She  knew 
① suffers  too,  as  we  become  less  aware  or  ‘mindful.’  Have 
it  was  hard  to  get  compliments  from  Megan  and  couldn’t 
you  ever  eaten  an  entire  meal  without  tasting  any  of  it? 
hide her smile. The two friends had desks side by side at 
Hurrying  up  doesn’t  just  give  us  less  time,  it  can  also 
the  back.  “Stop  talking,  you  two,”  said  Miss  Smith. 
steal  the  pleasure  and  benefit  from  the  time  that  we  do 
“Bring  your  books  to  me  if  you’ve  finished.”  Ellie 
have.  For  many  of  us,  hurrying  is  a  way  of  life.  Some 
followed  Megan  to  the  front  of  the  class.  She  always 
② of  us  enjoy  the  thrill  that  it  gives  us  while  others  are 
let  Megan  go  first.  She  felt  scared  when  Miss  Smith 
driven  crazy  by  the  constant  pressure  and  feel  that  their 
was  upset.  Miss  Smith  noticed  her  new  shoes.  “Those 
③ lives  are  speeding  up  to  an  unacceptable  degree.  Either 
aren’t  suitable  for  school,”  she  said,  her  voice  cold.  Ellie 
way,  there  are  almost  certainly  areas  of  our  life  that 
took  a  deep  breath.  “The  shop  didn’t  have  black  shoes,  
could be  .
  [3점]
Miss  Smith,”  she  said.  Her  voice  came  out  in  a 
④
affected by temporary sufferings
whisper.  “The  school  uniform  requires  black  or  dark  blue  ① 
disturbed by inconsistent behaviors
shoes,”  said  Miss  Smith.  “Report  to  me  in  proper  shoes,  ② 
please.  On  Monday.”  ⑤She  used  her  quiet-shout  voice  ③  enhanced by a little go-slow behavior
and Ellie shivered. ④  complicated by slow-but-steady actions 
*shiver: 떨다 ⑤  dominated by a little speedy decision making
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
33. The  audience  receives  a  sound  signal  entirely  through  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
the  vibrations  generated  in  the  air,  whereas  in  a  singer 
School  physical  education  programs  should  offer  a 
some  of  the  auditory  stimulus  is  conducted  to  the  ear 
balanced  variety  of  activities  that  allow  young  people  to 
through  the  singer’s  own  bones.  Since  these  two  ways  of 
develop  ability  in  lifetime  activities  that  are  personally 
transferring  sound  have  quite  different  relative  efficiencies 
meaningful  and  enjoyable.  A  balance  should  exist  in 
at  various  frequencies,  the  overall  quality  of  the  sound 
any  physical  education  program  among  team,  dual, 
will be quite different. You have probably experienced this 
and  individual  (lifetime)  sports.  Team  sports  such  as 
①
when you have listened to your own voice, as on tape or 
basketball  and  soccer  provide  an  opportunity  for  students 
through  a  public  address  system.  It  is  easy  to  blame  the 
to  develop  skills  and  to  enjoy  working  and  competing 
‘sound  of  a  stranger’  on  ‘poor  electronics,’  but  this  is 
together  as  a  team.  However,  in  many  school  physical 
②
only partly justified. The major effect comes from the fact 
education  programs,  team  sports  dominate  the  curriculum 
that you hear yourself differently from the way others hear 
at  the  expense  of  various  individual  and  dual  sports,  like 
you.  This  is  one  of  the  main  reasons  why  even  the  most 
tennis,  swimming,  badminton,  and  golf.  In  such  cases, 
③
accomplished  singers  have  to  listen  to  the  opinion  of 
the  students  lose  the  opportunity  to  develop  skills  in 
coaches and voice teachers as to ‘how they sound,’ whereas 
activities  that  they  can  participate  in  throughout  their 
no concert violinist would have to do such a thing. To the 
adult  lives.  Baseball,  in  particular,  is  one  of  the  most 
④
violinist   
popular sports frequently broadcast on TV.  Only through 
⑤
to someone else standing nearby.
  [3점] a  balanced  program  of  team,  dual,  and  individual  sports 
*frequency: 주파수 is it possible to develop well-rounded individuals.
the coaches are more helpful than they are *dual: 둘의
① 
sounds spread a lot more widely than they do
②
the audience response is just as important as it is
③ 
playing sounds almost exactly the same as it does
④ 
the ‘sound of a stranger’ matters more than it does
⑤
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
34. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? Cultural  characteristics  are  not  only  passed  from 
parents to children, but may be passed on from any one 
Problems  can  be  distinguished  according  to  whether 
individual to another by word of mouth or by writing.
they  are  reasonable  or  unreasonable.  Reasonable  problems 
are  of  the  kind  that  can  be  solved  in  a  step-by-step 
(A) Like  those  infectious  diseases,  cultural  habits  such  as 
manner.  A  crossword  puzzle  is  of  this  nature.  Given  a 
pop  music  preferences  and  clothing  fashions  may 
sufficient  vocabulary,  the  empty  spaces  can  be  filled  in 
spread  very  quickly  nowadays,  especially  through  the 
one by one. Unreasonable problems, (A) , cannot be 
media of radio and television.
treated  this  way  because  the  task contains some ‘trick’ or 
‘catch’  that  must  be  understood  before  someone  can  (B) So  some  cultural  changes  may  be  adopted  quite 
arrive at a solution. This feature frustrates any step-by-step  quickly  by  a  whole  population.  Transmission  of 
process  that  proceeds  without  the  realization  that  “things  culture  is  rather  like  transmission  of  an  infection.  Flu 
aren’t  what  they  seem.” (B) ,  successful  problem  and  colds  spread  very  quickly,  especially  with  the 
solving  in  these  cases  requires  that  the  person  acquire  an  large  amount  of  contact  that  people  now  have  with 
insight  into  the  nature  of  the  trick.  Riddles  provide  each other.
commonplace  instances  of  such  insight  problems,  such  as 
(C) However,  other  deep-rooted  cultural  characteristics  of 
the classic riddle that the Sphinx posed to Oedipus.
races and racial subgroups are much more difficult to 
change.  These  are  the  cultural  patterns  that  are  so 
(A) (B)
resistant  to  alteration  that  they  have  the  appearance 
in contrast Hence
① ……
of being inherent.  
in contrast Nevertheless
② ……
for example Hence (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ …… ①  － － ②  － －
for example Besides (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ …… ③  － － ④  － －
in addition Nevertheless (C) (B) (A)
⑤ …… ⑤  － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
37. 39.
The timing of positive versus negative behavior seems  They  quickly  pick  out  a  whole  series  of  items  of  the 
to  influence  attraction.  Several  studies  have  identified  same type, making a handful of, say, small screws. 
 
what has been called the loss-gain effect.
People  make  extensive  use  of  searching  images.  One 
(A) Studies  suggest  that  you  would  not.  In  fact,  people  unexpected context is sorting. Suppose you have a bag of 
are  more  attracted  to  individuals  who  are  consistently  small  hardware―screws,  nails,  and  so  on―and  you 
decide  to  organize  them  into  little  jars.  You  dump  the 
negative than to people who initially behave positively 
stuff  out  on  a  table  and  begin  separating  the  items  into 
and then switch to negative behavior.
coherent  groups. ( ) It  is  possible  to  do  this  by 
①
(B) The  reason  is  this:  people  who  start  out  being  nice 
randomly  picking  up  individual  objects,  one  by  one, 
get  our  hopes  up,  so  the  letdown  we  experience  identifying  each  one,  and  then  moving  it  to  the 
when  we  discover  that  they  are  not  nice  makes  it  appropriate  jar. ( ) But  what  most  people  do  is  very 
②
worse than if they had acted badly from the start. different. ( ) They  put  them  in  the  jar  and  then  go 
③
back and do the same for a different kind of item. ( ) 
④
(C) This effect reflects what happens to attraction when a 
So  the  sorting  sequence  is  nonrandom,  producing  runs  of 
person’s  behavior  moves  from  positive  to  negative  or 
items  of  a  single  type. ( ) It  is  a  faster,  more 
⑤
from  negative  to  positive.  For  example,  if  someone 
efficient  technique,  and  much  of  the  increased  efficiency 
seemed  very  nice  to  you  early  in  the  interaction,  but 
is due to the use of searching images. 
[3점]
then  began  to  act  like  a  fool,  would  you  be  more 
attracted  to  that  person  than  if  that  person  were  a  (A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
fool from the start?
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
There  are  two  types  of  managers  in  business 
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③  － － ④  － － organizations: functional managers and project managers. 
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  － － Both  types  of  managers  have  different  roles  and 
qualities.  Functional  managers  head  one  of  a  firm’s 
departments such as marketing or engineering, and they 
are specialists in the area they manage. They are skilled 
at  breaking  the  components  of  a  system  into  smaller 
elements,  knowing  something  of  the  details  of  each 
operation  for  which  they  are  responsible.  On  the  other 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
hand, project managers begin their career as specialists 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
in some field. When promoted to the position of project 
38.
manager, they must transform from technical caterpillar 
to  generalist  butterfly.  They  oversee  many  functional 
The spoonful of 95 soup hitting your foot hurts, but 
℃ 
areas, each with its own specialists. Therefore, what is 
not as badly as it would if you accidentally spilled the 
required  is  an  ability  to  put  many  pieces  of  a  task 
entire pot of 95 soup on your foot.
℃  together to form a coherent whole. Thus, to understand 
a frog, for example, functional managers cut it open to 
Heat  and  temperature  are  two  quantities  that  can  be 
examine  it,  but  project  managers  watch  it  swim  with 
easily  confused.  Imagine  cooking  a  very  large  pot  of 
other frogs and consider the environment. 
chicken  soup  on  the  stove.  Let’s  suppose  you  heat  the 
*caterpillar: 애벌레
soup until it is 95 , quite hot. ( ) You grab a spoon  ??
℃ ①
and  take  out  a  spoonful  of  soup  to  taste.  ( )  As  you 
②
In  business  organizations,  compared  with  the  functional 
remove  the  spoonful  of  soup  from  the  pot,  it  has  the 
managers who generally  (A) what forms a system, 
same temperature as the larger sample. ( ) Unfortunately, 
③
project managers focus on (B) all of its elements.
as you bring the soup towards your mouth to taste it, the 
spoon  slips  from  your  hand,  pouring  its  contents  on  your 
(A) (B)
bare  foot.  ( )  If  both  the  spoonful  and  the  pot  full  of 
④ analyze splitting
① ……
soup  have  the  same  temperature,  why  would  the  larger  analyze combining
② ……
sample  cause  more  damage  if  it  came  in  contact  with  modify distributing
③ ……
your  skin?  ( ⑤ )  The  answer  to  the  question  lies  in  the  ④ assemble …… dividing
difference between temperature and heat. assemble blending
⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Some  of  it  belonged  to  Stacey,  Christopher,  and  John, 
It isn’t going to be easy making changes to the food 
not  to  mention  the  part  that  belonged  to  big  mama  and 
your  children  eat,  and  even  the  most  careful,  patient 
mama. However, papa never divided the land in his mind; 
parents will probably find that the little ones will resist 
it was simply the land of our family. For it, (b)he would 
at some point and to some degree. The problem is that 
work the long, hot summer pounding steel; mama would 
many  of  us  were  forced  to  eat  in  a  healthy  way  as 
teach  and  run  the  farm;  and  big  mama,  in  her  sixties, 
children: we learned the hard way. And the temptation 
would  work  like  a  woman  in  her  twenties  in  the  cotton 
to  continue  with  these  parental  habits  with  our  own  fields and keep the house; but always, the taxes would be 
children is strong. paid. Papa said that one day I would understand.
If  you  were  made  to  sit  at  the  table  until  you  had 
(C)
cleaned your plate, you are not alone: most of the adult 
population have suffered this at some point at school  When  he  came  back  from  Louisiana,  I  asked  papa 
―
if not at home. Forcing your children to eat, especially  why  he  had  to  go  away  and  why  the  land  was  so 
important.  (c)He  took  my  hand  and  said  in  his  quiet 
if  they  don’t  like  what  is  on  the  plate,  is  completely 
way:  “Look  out  there,  Cassie.  All  that  belongs  to  you. 
.  “Sit  there  until  you  finish”  may  be 
You  will  never  have  to  live  on  other  people’s  land.  As 
how we learned, and may also be the only way you feel 
long  as  the  family  survives,  you  will  have  your  own 
able  to  achieve  your  goal,  but  think  about  it:  the 
place.  That’s  important.  You  may  not  understand  now, 
experience  of  eating  a  pile  of  unwanted  cabbage  until 
but  one  day  you  will.”  I  looked  at  papa  strangely,  for  I 
they feel sick is hardly going to make children jump for 
knew that all the land did not belong to me.
joy the next time it is served. 
This  strict  approach  is  very  old-fashioned,  and  you  (D) 
may  win  the  battle  but  you  definitely  won’t  win  the 
That  was  why  papa  had  gone  to  work,  ending  up  in 
war. Delaying puddings used to be thought of as a good  Louisiana  in  1931.  (d)He  set  out  looking  for  work,  first 
idea too, but guess what? That doesn’t work either. “No  going far north and south, and finally west into Louisiana. 
pudding until you have finished your main course” was  It was there he found work laying track for the railroad. 
the  standard  line  when  most  parents  of  today  were  He worked the remainder of the year away from us, not 
returning until the deep winter. The following spring after 
young  and  is  still  commonly  used,  but  it  only  makes 
the  planting  was  finished,  (e)he  did  the  same.  Now  it 
sweet things seem more desirable.
was 1933, and papa was again in Louisiana laying track.
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A)
Do Old Feeding Habits Work? 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
① 
No More Instant Foods for Kids 가장 적절한 것은?
② 
③  Kids Today Need Table Manners  ①  (B)－(D)－(C) ②  (C)－(B)－(D)
④  Time to Switch to Organic Food! ③  (C)－(D)－(B) ④  (D)－(B)－(C)
⑤  Homemade Pudding Makes Us Perfect ⑤  (D)－(C)－(B)
(a) (e)
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점] 44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
counterproductive beneficial invaluable ①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
①  ②  ③ 
unconventional constructive
④  ⑤ 
45. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
‘grandpa’ 1887 200
①  는  년에  에이커의 땅을 샀다.
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
1930
②  년에 면화 가격이 하락했다. 
(A) 
‘big mama’ 60
③  는  대에 목화밭 일을 하지 않았다. 
In  1887,  when  the  land  was  up  for  sale,  grandpa  ‘I’ ‘papa’
④  는  에게 왜 그 땅이 중요한지 물었다.
bought  two  hundred  acres  from  the  Granger  family.  In  ‘papa’ Louisiana
⑤  는  에서 철로를 놓는 일을 한 적이 있다.
1918,  (a)he  bought  another  two  hundred.  It  was  good 
rich land. However, there were bank loans for and taxes on 
the land. Unfortunately, there had not been enough money  *  확인 사항
from  the  cotton  to  pay  both  of  them  and  live  on.  To 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
make things worse, the price of cotton dropped in 1930.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2011학년도 대학수학능력시험 9월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
제 3 교시
7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일을 고르시오.
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 
 to go on a business trip   
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다. ①
 to talk to the supervisor
②
 to email his check-up results
1. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 구입할 연필깎이를 고르시오. ③
 to pick up the medical documents
④
① ② ③
 to send the documents via regular mail
⑤
8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 
④ ⑤
곳을 고르시오.
①  호텔 ②  독서실 ③  레스토랑
④  공항 환전소 ⑤  전자 제품 매장
2. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
 nervous  frightened  envious ①  직장 상사 -  비서 ②  매표소 직원 -  관람객
① ② ③
 bored  furious ③  회의 진행자 -  토론자 ④  관광 안내원 -  관광객
④ ⑤
⑤  항공기 승무원 -  탑승객
3. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
10. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
고르시오.
①  보고서 작성하기 ②  생일 선물 추천하기
①  다양한 발성법 훈련의 필요성
③  쇼핑 정보 제공하기 ④  상품 가격 문의하기
②  신체 구조와 목소리의 관련성
⑤  백화점 신용카드 찾기
③  운동 전 근육 스트레칭의 장점
④  노래하기 전 발성 연습의 중요성
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택할 장소를 
⑤  체력 단련이 발성에 미치는 효과
고르시오.
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  수업 교재 찾기 ②  친구와 토론하기
③  책상 정리 정돈하기 ④  문자 메시지 보내기
⑤  급우 만나 사과하기
①
②
③
5. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 받을 거스름돈의 액수를 고르시오.
④
 $2.00  $4.00  $5.00
① ② ③ ⑤
 $6.00  $9.00
④ ⑤
12. 어느 대학이 개설할 도자기 강좌에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 
6. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 말하는 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.  [3점]
①  엘리베이터 점검 지연을 사과하려고 ①  미술학과에서 제공하는 것이다.
②  주차 위반 차량에 대해 주의를 주려고  ②  초급반,  중급반,  고급반으로 구성된다.
5
③  지하 주차장의 차량 이동을 요청하려고 ③  도자기 강의 경력이  년 이상인 강사가 가르친다.
④  지하 주차장 보수 공사에 대해 안내하려고 ④  학생들은 수료 후 도자기 전시회에 참여할 수 있다.
⑤  지하 주차장 물청소 시간 변경을 알리려고 ⑤  재학생의 경우 재료비만 내면 수강할 수 있다.
1
82
외국어(영어) 영역
13. 다음 그림 속의 두 사람의 대화로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [1점]
  이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
I was pleased to receive your letter requesting a letter of 
reference for a Future Leaders scholarship. As your physics 
teacher,  I  can  certainly  speak  highly  of  your  academic 
abilities.  Your  grades  have  consistently  been  A’s  and  B’s 
in my class. Since this is the first semester that I have had 
you  in  class,  however,  I  do  not  feel  that  I  am  the  right 
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
person  to  provide  information  on  your  leadership  skills.  I 
would  encourage  you  to  request  a  reference  letter  from 
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
those  teachers  with  whom  you  have  had  the  most 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
opportunity  to  demonstrate  those  skills.  I  am  sure  many 
M: ______________________________________________ teachers would be willing to provide letters for you. Good 
luck with your scholarship.
 You’d better go to see a doctor.
①
①  장학금 추천서 부탁을 거절하려고
 We should check the lost and found.
②
②  뛰어난 학업 성취를 칭찬하려고
 You will take the jacket off sooner or later.
③
③  물리학 강좌 수강을 안내하려고
 Let’s see if there is a store that sells jackets.
④
④  장학금 수혜 소식을 알려주려고
 We should go buy a bigger suitcase right now.
⑤
⑤  장학금 신청을 권유하려고
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
she[her]
19. 밑줄 친  가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
적절한 것을 고르시오.
There  was  a  girl  who  grew  flowers  in  New  Jersey  and 
M: ______________________________________________
sometimes took flowers to customers on Staten Island. To get 
① Come on! Learning is more important than grades. there, ①she had to go over a bridge paying a toll of $2.50. 
One day, as she was approaching the toll booth, she saw a 
I enjoyed your lecture. I’d like to take your class again.
②
toll booth attendant who reminded  her of her mother. As 
That’s wonderful! Thank you for signing up for the class. ②
③
she reached in  her pocket, she found she had no money 
③
Right. I need to reconsider whether I should take her class.
④ but a half dollar. Not knowing what to do,  she handed the 
④
I’m sorry about your grades. You can do better next time.
⑤ coin to her and asked nervously, “Want to buy a fresh red 
rose?” The attendant looked surprised at first, but glancing 
16. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  at the cars piling up behind her, she took two dollars from 
her purse and rang it up on the cash register. “Yes, I’ll take 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
it,”  she said with a smile. “And I suppose the price is two 
⑤
W: ______________________________________________
dollars even, right?”
 Will you be paying by cash or charge? 
①
 Would you like me to gift-wrap your album?
② 20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?
 Can you make a couple of copies of this document?
③
The  phrase,  ‘jack-of-all-trades’  is  a  shortened  version 
①
 Could you wish your father a happy birthday for me?
④ of ‘jack of all trades and master of none.’ It refers to those 
 Do you want me to check if our main store has one?
⑤ who  claim to be proficient at countless tasks, but cannot 
②
perform  a  single  one  of  them  well.  The  phrase  was  first 
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Yumi가 교수에게 할 말로 가장 적 used in England at the start of the Industrial Revolution. A 
large number of efficiency experts set up shop in London, 
절한 것을 고르시오.
advertising  themselves  as  knowledgeable  about  every 
③
Yumi: ___________________________________________
type of new manufacturing process, trade, and business. For 
a substantial fee, they would impart their knowledge to their 
 Could you tell me what I did wrong in the examination?
①
clients. But it soon became  evident that their knowledge 
④
 Is it possible for me to take the exam on another day?
② was limited and of no practical value. Doubtful industrialists 
 I wish my team had done better in the dance competition.
③ started  calling  these  self-appointed  experts  ‘jacks  of  all 
④ If you give me a chance, I promise to win the grand prize. trades and masters of none.’ These experts are still with us, 
How can I become a member of the college dance team? and as a result so  does the phrase.
⑤ ⑤
2
83
외국어(영어) 영역
(A) (B) (C) Michael
21. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장  24. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
적절한 것은?
Michael  dared  to  look  inside  the  window,  but  from  the 
Mr. Potter was sailing for Europe on one of the greatest  deep shadow of the trees and the gloom within, he could not 
transatlantic ocean liners. When he went on board, he found  clearly make out the objects within. Although every nerve in 
(A)another/other  passenger  was  to  share  the  cabin  with  his  body  cautioned  otherwise,  he  slowly  pushed  open  the 
him. After going to see the accommodations, he came up to  door. The door creaked as it swung back. As he carefully 
the  purser’s  desk  and  inquired  (B) if/that  he  could  leave  took a step inside, the door slammed shut. Michael’s futile 
his  valuables  in  the  ship’s  safe.  Mr.  Potter  explained  that  attempts to open the door only increased his panic. He tried 
ordinarily he never availed himself of that privilege, but he  to calm his thundering heart by repeating to himself, “I am 
had  been  to  his  cabin  and  had  met  the  man  who  was  to  not afraid. I am not afraid,” but to no avail. He suddenly felt 
occupy  the  other  bed.  Judging  from  his  appearance,  he  an uneasy darkness consume him from within. He opened 
was afraid that he might not be a very trustworthy person.  his mouth to call for help, but his words failed him.
The purser accepted the responsibility for the valuables and 
 sympathetic    weary  horrified
(C) remarking/remarked, “It’s all right. I’ll be very glad to  ① ② ③
 disappointed    gloomy
take care of them for you. The other man has been up here  ④ ⑤
and left his valuables for the same reason!”
*purser: 
선박의 사무장
[25～30] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
   (A)   (B)   (C)
another that remarking 25. Errors  and  failures  typically  corrupt  all  human  designs. 
① …… ……
another if remarked Indeed, the failure of a single component of your car’s engine 
② …… ……
another if remarking could  force  you  to  call  for  a  tow  truck.  Similarly,  a  tiny 
③ …… ……
other if remarked wiring error in your computer’s circuits can mean throwing 
④ …… ……
other that remarked the  whole  computer  out.  Natural  systems  are  different, 
⑤ …… ……
though. Throughout Earth’s history, an estimated 3 million 
to 100 million species have disappeared, which means that 
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
this  year  somewhere  between  three  and  a  hundred  species 
Geothermal heat, generated inside the Earth, helps keep the  will  vanish.  However,  such  natural  extinctions  appear  to 
temperature of the ground at a depth of several meters at a  cause little harm. Over millions of years the ecosystem has 
nearly constant temperature of about 10°C to 20°C.  This  developed an amazing ___________ to errors and failures, 
①
constant temperature can be used to cool and heat buildings  surviving  even  such  drastic  events  as  the  impact  of  the 
by using a heat pump.  A heat pump contains a water-filled  Yucatan meteorite, which killed tens of thousands of species.
②
loop of pipe, which is buried to a depth where the temperature 
*meteorite: 
운석
is  nearly  constant.  In  summer,  warm  water  from  the 
③
building is pumped through the pipe down into the ground,   connection  intolerance  insensitivity
① ② ③
since  the  underground  temperature  is  lower  than  the  air   accessibility  subjectivity
④ ⑤
temperature.  However, far more use is made of geothermal 
④
energy for direct heat than any other source of energy.  The 
⑤
water cools and then is pumped back to the building where  26. Unlike deviance in other settings, deviance in sports often 
it absorbs more heat, and the cycle is repeated. involves  ___________________  norms  and  expectations. 
For example, most North Americans see playing football as 
a  positive  activity.  Young  men  are  encouraged  to  ‘be  all 
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? they can be’ as football players and to live by slogans such 
as  “There  is  no  ‘I’  in  t-e-a-m.”  They  are  encouraged  to 
Comparing  yourself  with  others  is  natural  and  can  be 
increase  their  weight  and  strength,  so  that  they  can  play 
motivational.  However,  too  much  of  it  leads  to  envy, 
more  effectively  and  contribute  to  the  success  of  their 
especially if you’re ungenerous toward yourself. Instead, try 
teams. When young men go too far in their acceptance of 
measuring your present self against your past self. When I 
expectations to become bigger and stronger, when they are 
asked a salesperson to map his sales performance, he was 
so committed to playing football and improving their skills 
amazed  to  see  that  he  had  achieved  a  5%  to  10%  annual  on the field that they use muscle-building drugs, they become 
increase in sales while at his firm. This made him feel more  deviant.  This  type  of  ‘overdoing-it-deviance’  is  dangerous, 
self-confident  and  lessened  his  resentment  toward  his  but it is grounded in completely different social dynamics 
colleagues.  If  you  feel  threatened  every  time  a  perceived  from  the  dynamics  that  occur  in  the  ‘antisocial  deviance’ 
rival does well, remind yourself of your own strengths and  enacted  by  alienated  young  people  who  reject  commonly 
successes.  accepted rules and expectations.
 a disciplined control of the desire to avoid
①  타인의 장점을 인정하자.  ①
 wasted efforts and resources in establishing
②  결과보다는 과정에 충실하자.    ②
 ambitious attempts to get independent of and free from
③  타인을 통해 자신을 돌아보자.  ③
 a traditional approach of matching slogans and mottos with
④  자신의 능력과 장점에 초점을 맞추자. ④
an unquestioned acceptance of and extreme conformity to
⑤  자신의 감정을 통제하는 능력을 기르자. ⑤
3
84
외국어(영어) 영역
27. Time pressure leads to frustration, and when we are frustrated  30. The  most  obvious  salient  feature  of  moral  agents  is  a 
or experience other negative emotions, our thinking becomes  capacity for rational thought. This is an uncontested necessary 
narrower and less creative. However, people are unaware of  condition  for  any  form  of  moral  agency,  since  we  all 
this phenomenon and live under the illusion that when they  accept  that  people  who  are  incapable  of  reasoned  thought 
are experiencing time pressure, they are also more creative.  cannot  be  held  morally  responsible  for  their  actions. 
This explains why time pressure is pervasive and to some  However, if we move beyond this uncontroversial salient 
extent accounts for the increase in rates of depression. We are  feature  of  moral  agents,  then  the  most  salient  feature  of 
generally too busy trying to squeeze more and more activities  actual flesh-and-blood (as opposed to ridiculously idealized) 
into less and less time. Consequently, we fail to enjoy potential  individual moral agents is surely the fact that every moral 
sources of happiness that may be all around us. To enjoy the  agent __________________________________ every moral 
richness that life has to offer, ________________________. problem situation. That is, there is no one-size-fits-all answer 
to  the  question  “What  are  the  basic  ways  in  which  moral 
 we need to take our time
①
agents wish to affect others?” Rather, moral agents wish to 
 we should maximize our opportunities
②
affect ‘others’ in different ways depending upon who these 
 we have to deal with depression wisely
③ ‘others’ are.
 it is necessary to explore some creative ideas
④
⑤ it is important to embrace even negative emotions ① brings multiple perspectives to bear on
seeks an uncontroversial cure-all solution to
②
28. With  no  attempt  there  can  be  no  failure  and  with  no  ③ follows the inevitable fate of becoming idealized in
failure  no  humiliation.  So  our  self-esteem  in  this  world  comes with prejudices when assessing the features of
④
depends entirely on what we back ourselves to be and do.  sacrifices moral values to avoid being held responsible for
⑤
It is determined by the ratio of our actualities to our supposed 
potentialities.  Thus,  ________________________________. 
(A) (B) (C)
31. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
This illustrates how every rise in our levels of expectation 
entails  a  rise  in  the  dangers  of  humiliation.  What  we  적절한 것은?
understand to be normal is critical in determining our chances  When  it  comes  to  food  choices,  young  people  are 
of  happiness.  It  also  hints  at  two  ways  for  raising  our  particularly  (A) vulnerable/immune  to  peer  influences.  A 
self-esteem. On the one hand, we may try to achieve more;  teenage girl may eat nothing but a lettuce salad for lunch, 
and on the other, we may reduce the number of things we  even though she will become hungry later, because that is 
want to achieve. The advantages of the latter approach lie in  what her friends are eating. A slim boy who hopes to make 
the following statement: To give up pretensions is as blessed  the wrestling team may routinely overload his plate with foods 
a relief as to get them gratified. 
[3점] that are (B) dense/deficient in carbohydrates and proteins to 
‘bulk up’ like the wrestlers of his school. An overweight teen 
 the higher your expectations are, the more you will achieve
①
may eat (C) greedily /moderately while around his friends 
self-esteem can be increased by lowering actualities
②
but  then  devour  huge  portions  when  alone.  Few  young 
success divided by pretensions equals self-esteem
③ people are completely free of food-related pressures from 
 early failures in life may lead to happiness later in life
④ peers, whether or not these pressures are imposed intentionally.
 more supposed potentialities increase chances of happiness
⑤ *carbohydrate: 
탄수화물
29. For many people ‘nature’ is defined as a negative: It exists      (A) (B)    (C)
where  people  do  not.  Nature  lies  outside  the  urban  and  ① vulnerable …… dense …… greedily
agricultural  realms,  in  regions  of  Earth  where  natural  ② vulnerable …… dense …… moderately
processes are unhindered. Nature is where fallen logs rot and  vulnerable deficient greedily
③ …… ……
acorns grow, wildfires turn woodlands into meadows, and  immune deficient moderately
④ …… ……
barrier islands shift with the currents all without human  immune dense greedily
― ⑤ …… ……
interference. By extension, this definition suggests that nature 
is best protected by keeping humans far away, so that it can 
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
continue to run itself. But there is a serious problem with this 
view. If nature is defined as a landscape uninfluenced by  않은  것은?  [3점]
humankind, then __________________________. Prehistoric 
It is said that although people laugh in the same way, they 
peoples  changed  their  surrounding  ecosystems,  whether  by 
don’t necessarily laugh at the same things. If this is true of a 
installing orchards in the Amazon or by hunting many large 
single community, it is even more true of people who live in 
mammals  to  extinction  in  North  America.  And  modern 
different societies, because the topics that people find amusing, 
humans  are  changing  the  global  environment  even  more 
and the occasions that are regarded as  appropriate for joking, 
profoundly, whether through planet-wide climate change, or  ①
can vary enormously from one society to the next. Some styles 
by the worldwide movement of synthetic chemicals through 
of  humor  with  silly  actions  are  guaranteed  to  raise  a  laugh 
the food chain.
everywhere. But because of their reliance on shared assumptions, 
① humans cannot exist without nature most jokes travel very ②well. This is particularly ③noticeable 
② there is no nature on the planet at all in the case of jokes that involve a play on words. They are 
 it deserves to be preserved at all costs difficult, and in some cases virtually  impossible to translate 
③ ④
 modern people owe much to their ancestors into other languages. Therefore, this is why people’s attempts 
④
 humans are at the mercy of the forces of nature to tell jokes to  foreigners are so often met with blank stares.
⑤ ⑤
4
85
외국어(영어) 영역
33. 다음 글의 빈칸 (A),  (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 35. A famous psychiatrist was leading a symposium on the 
Many grocery stores give the shopper the option of paper  methods of getting patients to open up about themselves. The 
or  plastic  grocery  bags.  Many  people  instinctively  say  that  psychiatrist challenged his colleagues with a boast: “I’ll bet 
paper is less harmful to the environment after all, paper is  that my technique will enable me to get a new patient to talk 
―
biodegradable and recyclable.  (A) , most plastic is  about the most private things during the first session without 
manufactured using oil by-products and natural gas. Plastic  my having to ask a question.” What was his magic formula? 
is  not  always  easily  or  economically  recyclable,  and  once  Simply this: He began the session by revealing to the patient 
manufactured, plastic may last virtually indefinitely. Yet in the  something personal about himself―secrets with which the 
United States, paper products are the single largest component  patient might damage the doctor by breaking the confidence. 
of  municipal  waste.  Even  though  paper  products  may  As he was ‘maskless,’ patients began to talk about their lives. 
theoretically be biodegradable, in most landfills, they do  They opened themselves up to him because he had become 
not biodegrade.  (B) ,  paper production emits air  an  open-minded  person  himself,  and  openness  evoked 
pollution,  specifically  70  percent  more  pollution  than  the  openness. The same principle applies to all human relationships. 
production of plastic bags. And consider that making paper uses  If you dare to take the initiative in self-revelation, the other 
trees that could be absorbing carbon dioxide. The paper bag  person is much more likely to reveal secrets to you.
making process also results in three times more water pollutants 
being frank with patients with serious illness
①
than making plastic bags.
opening up oneself to draw out the other person
②
need of confidentiality between doctors and patients
   (A) (B) ③
In contrast Furthermore effects of a new treatment on psychological problems
① …… ④
In contrast However rebuilding broken relationships between close acquaintances
② …… ⑤
As a result Likewise
③ ……
For instance Nonetheless
④ ……
For instance Therefore
⑤ ……
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Familiarity of Five Social Media
34. While  predictions  about  the  future  are  always  difficult, 
one can be made with certainty. People will find themselves 
in  large  numbers  of  interactions  where  intercultural 
communication  skills  will  be  essential.  There  are  several 
reasons for such prediction. Some reasons include increasing 
amounts of contact brought on by overseas assignments in 
the  business  world,  the  movement  of  college  students 
spending time in other countries, and increasing amounts of 
international  travel  among  tourists.  Others  relate  to  social 
changes within any one large and complex nation: affirmative 
action, the movement of immigrants and refugees, bilingual 
education programs, and movement away from the goal that 
The  bar  graph  above  shows  the  familiarity  of  the 
ethnic minorities become a part of a ‘melting pot.’ Therefore, 
respondents with five prominent social media in 2007 and 
it  is  essential  that  people  research  the  cultures  and 
2008.  According to the graph, the social media that was 
①
communication conventions of those whom they propose to 
the most familiar in 2007 was blogging.  In the following 
②
meet in the future.
year,  social  networking  became  the  most  familiar  social 
*affirmative action: 
소수민족 차별 철폐 조치 media.  Video blogging, which was the least familiar social 
③
predictions of social changes in other countries media  in  2007,  showed  the  biggest  increase  in  familiarity 
①
necessity of understanding intercultural communication among the three media that showed an increase from 2007 
②
importance of good educators in a multicultural nation to 2008.  Wikis showed a bigger decrease in familiarity 
③ ④
limitations of communication conventions across cultures than podcasting from 2007 to 2008.  In 2008, podcasting 
④ ⑤
methods of intercultural communication in the business world and wikis were the least familiar social media.
⑤
5
86
외국어(영어) 영역
37. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? ① 여행과 축제는 인생을 풍요롭게 하는 촉매제이다.
During the early 1980s, a team of Italian scientists carried  ② 현실을 도외시한 예측은 부정적인 결과를 초래한다.
out a series of studies under a variety of circumstances on  ③ 바람직한 결과를 기대하면 현실의 어려움은 최소화된다.
the  ticklishness  of  people.  The  researchers  found  that  ④ 결과가 좋으면 나쁜 기억은 최소화되고 좋은 기억은 강화된다.
people seem to have one foot that is more ticklish than the 
⑤ 기쁨을 얻기 위해 겪는 고통은 미래를 위한 투자가 될 수 있다.
other and for most people it is the right. The experiment 
―
was  repeated  in  1998  using  a  special  way  that  a  pointed 
nylon rod was stroked across the bottom of the foot three 
times at intervals of a second. After applying it to thirty-four 
40. Every  day,  it  seems,  we  learn  of  an  apology  from  a 
people, the researchers confirmed the original finding and 
prominent figure in response to an indiscretion of some sort. 
pushed  back  the  frontiers  of  knowledge  still  further  by 
showing  that  males  were  more  ticklish  than  females.  One  Those  in  the  public  eye  have  an  unfortunate  tendency  to 
suggested  explanation  is  that  the  left  side  of  the  brain, 
apologize only after they have been found with a hand in the 
which detects stimuli applied to the right foot, is associated 
cookie  jar.  When  this  happens,  it  is  only  natural  for  a 
with positive emotions such as laughter. 
skeptical public to wonder, “Are they apologizing for their 
1980
①  년대 말에 이탈리아 과학자들이 간지럼에 대해 연구하였다. conduct,  or  simply  because  they  were  caught?”  To  make 
②  양쪽 발이 똑같이 간지럼을 타는 것으로 나타났다.
matters worse, the wrongdoer will often use the passive voice 
③  나일론 봉으로 무릎을 쓰다듬는 방식으로 실험이 재연되었다.
in his or her apology: “Mistakes were made,” rather than, “I 
④  여자가 남자보다 간지럼을 더 많이 타는 것으로 밝혀졌다.
made a mistake.” It is more comfortable to use the passive 
⑤  왼쪽 뇌가 긍정적 감정과 연관된다는 설명이 제시되었다.
voice here, but doing so relinquishes any sense of personal 
38. Buffon에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? responsibility. It is a non-apology and is not very meaningful.
Buffon  was  a  famous  zoologist  and  botanist  during  the  *relinquish: 저버리다
reign of the French monarch Louis . Buffon stocked the 
ⅩⅥ
park at Versailles with wild animals. He also expanded the  ①  대중은 사회 문제에 민감하게 반응한다.
botanical garden on the Left Bank in Paris. And with the  ②  저명인사들은 자선 활동에 앞장서야 한다.
confidence that goes with being a great collector, he began 
③  대중은 지도자의 과실을 감시할 필요가 있다.
writing  a  comprehensive  natural  history  of  the  world.  In 
④  저명인사는 실수를 저지르지 않도록 노력해야 한다.
that work, Buffon expressed the biased opinion that native 
animals  of  the  New  World  are  smaller  than  those  of  ⑤  저명인사들의 책임 회피성 사과는 진정한 사과가 아니다.
Europe, that there are fewer species of animals in America, 
and  that  even  domesticated  species  of  European  animals 
diminished  in  size  and  vigor  upon  crossing  the  Atlantic. 
Obviously,  his  opinions  were  not  well-received  and  were 
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
severely criticized in America.
Louis 41. We can infer that there was prosperity in ancient Athens 
①  ⅩⅥ가  통치할 때의 동물학자이자 식물학자였다.
Paris Left Bank because this was a time that saw the planting of many olive 
②  의  에 있는 식물원을 확장했다.
③  세계 자연사에 관한 글을 집필하기 시작했다. trees. Since olive trees do not produce their fruits for about 
America Europe
④  의 동물 종(種)이  보다 많다는 견해를 표명했다. thirty  years,  their  planting  indicates  that  people  were 
America
⑤  그의 견해들은  에서 비판을 받았다.
optimistic about the future. The growth in the export of olive 
oil also encouraged the development of pottery, in which the 
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
oil was transported. About 535 B.C. came the invention of 
39. After an event, all one has are memories of it. Because  red-figure vase painting. Now the whole surface of the vase 
most waits expect a desired outcome, it is the memory of the 
was blackened, with figures picked out in the natural red. 
outcome that dominates, not the intermediate components. If 
This  allowed  much  more  variety  and  realism.  And  the 
the overall outcome is pleasurable enough, any unpleasantness 
prosperity brought about by the international trade in olive 
suffered along the way is minimized. Terence Mitchell and 
Leigh Thompson call this ‘rosy retrospection.’ Mitchell and  oil spread to the peasants and it was their rituals, with choral 
his colleagues studied participants in a 12-day tour of Europe,  song  and  mimic  dancing,  that  formed  the  basis  of  early 
students  going  home  for  Thanksgiving  vacation  and  a 
theater.
three-week bicycle tour across California. In all of these cases, 
the  results  were  similar.  Before  an  event,  people  looked  Ancient Greece and Its Rich History
①
forward with positive anticipation. Afterward, they remembered 
What Olive Planting Brought to Athens
②
fondly. During? Well, reality seldom lives up to expectations, 
Olive Oil and Its Many Wondrous Uses 
so plenty of things go wrong. As memory takes over, however,  ③
The Olive Tree: Key to Early Greek Theater
the unpleasantness fades and the good parts remain, perhaps  ④
to intensify, and even get amplified beyond reality. Ancient Athens: Center of International Trade
⑤
6
87
외국어(영어) 영역
42. Until  recently,  it  was  generally  assumed  that  the  first  44. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
humans took a northerly route to leave the African continent, 
The  clanhouse  usually  consists  of  a  room  adjoining 
walking into the Middle East and then spreading out from 
the dwelling of the senior female member of the clan.
there. However, mtDNA analysis now suggests the exodus 
may have proceeded via a more southerly route. In 2005, an  Hopi  religion  features  a  ritual  calendar  that  includes  a 
large number of annually required ceremonies. In most cases, 
international team of researchers announced that an isolated 
each ceremony is ‘owned’ by the members of a certain clan. 
group living in Malaysia appeared to be the descendants of 
( )Every clan represented in a village has a clanhouse 
①
humans who left Africa around 65,000 years ago. According 
in  which  the  masks  and  other  sacred  items  used  in  the 
to  the  researchers,  climatic  change  underway  at  the  time  ceremonies are kept when not in use. ( )This woman is 
②
would  have  made  a  southerly  route  easier.  The  genetic  in  charge  of  storing  ritual  equipment  and  of  seeing  to  it 
that  they  are  treated  with  the  proper  respect.  ( )There 
evidence  suggests  perhaps  as  few  as  several  hundred  ③
is also a male head of each clan whose duties likewise are 
individuals  went  first  to  India,  then  Southeast  Asia  and 
partly religious because he is in charge of the performance 
Australasia.  If  correct,  this  would  explain  why  humans 
of  ceremonies  owned  by  his  clan.  ( ) A  male  clan 
④
appear to have reached Australia around 50,000 years ago, 
head passes his position down to either his younger brother 
while  the  oldest  human  remains  in  Europe―a  jawbone  or  his  sister’s  son.  ( ⑤ )In  this  way,  culturally  important 
found in Romania are only around 35,000 years old. ritual knowledge is kept within the clan.
―
*clan: 
*mtDNA:  DNA 씨족
미토콘드리아 
 Out of Africa: Which Way?
①
(A)
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
 Are Asians the First Humans?
②
(B)
 How Reliable is mtDNA Analysis? 에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
③
 Climatic Change in Ancient Africa The  information  processing  model  emphasizes  rational 
④
 Genetic Evolution of Human Beings analysis  for  solving  problems,  with  an  emphasis  on 
⑤
techniques for quickly arriving at a solution. Culturally, this 
orientation fits well with the kinds of mental attributes which 
are normally valued by contemporary Western societies. For 
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? example,  Westerners  tend  to  admire  someone  who  is 
independent and quick-thinking. But these characteristics are 
Even  worse  than  reaching  a  conclusion  with  just  a  not  universally  valued.  Agricultural  African  societies,  for 
little  evidence  is  the  fallacy  of  reaching  a  conclusion  example, valued looking at the problem in the context of the 
whole society, noting its impact on various features of life. 
without any evidence at all. Sometimes people mistake 
In most situations, speed in arriving at a solution was not a 
a separate event for a cause-and-effect relationship. 
vital issue. This is also found with the Cree and Ojibway in 
Canada. These groups historically lived in wilderness areas 
(A)  You  therefore  leap  to  the  conclusion  that  the  man  in 
and  faced  many  hardships;  in  these  circumstances,  they 
the black jacket has robbed the bank. However, such a 
would  rarely  get  a  second  chance  at  solving  problems. 
leap tends to land far from the truth of the matter. You 
Consequently,  these  Native  people  value  taking  time  to 
have absolutely no evidence only a suspicion based 
― reflect  on  a  problem  and  mentally  walk  through  possible 
on coincidence. This is a post hoc fallacy.
solutions before any action is taken.
??
(B) They  see  that  ‘A’  happened  before  ‘B’,  so  they 
mistakenly assume that ‘A’ caused ‘B’. This is an error 
In  modern  Western  societies,  (A)   is  highly 
known in logic as a post hoc fallacy.
valued  in  problem-solving,  whereas  it  is  viewed 
(C) For example, suppose you see a man in a black jacket  differently  in  some  non-Western  societies  due  to  their 
(B) .
hurry  into  a  bank.  You  notice  that  he  is  nervously 
carrying  his  briefcase,  and  a  few  moments  later  you 
    (A) (B)
hear a siren. speed religious beliefs
① ……
speed technical advances
② ……
 (A) - (B) - (C)  (A) - (C) - (B)
① ②
speed cultural backgrounds
③ ……
 (B) - (A) - (C)  (B) - (C) - (A)
③ ④ deliberation mental attributes
④ ……
 (C) - (B) - (A) deliberation living conditions
⑤ ⑤ ……
7
88
외국어(영어) 영역
(B)
[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Befriending life is not always about having things your 
The other day an acquaintance of mine, a sociable and 
own way. Life is impermanent and full of broken eggs. But 
charming man, told me he had found himself unexpectedly 
what is true of eggs is even more true of pain and loss and 
‘alone’ in New York for an hour or two between appointments. 
suffering.  Certain  things  are  too  important  to  be  wasted. 
He  went  to  the  Whitney  Museum  and  spent  the  ‘empty’  When I was sixteen, just after the doctor came and informed 
time looking at things by himself. For him it proved to be  me that I had a disease that no one knew how to cure, my 
a shock nearly as great as falling in love to discover that  mother had reminded me of this.
he could enjoy himself so much alone.
(C)
What  had  he  been  afraid  of?  I  asked  myself.  That, 
suddenly alone, he would discover that he bored himself,  But this abundance did not mean that things were to be 
wasted. Everything was always used to the full. Even the 
or that there was, quite simply, no self there to meet? But 
tea bags were used twice. There is a family story told about 
having taken the first step into this new world, he is now 
my grandmother’s refrigerator. Her refrigerator was always 
about to begin a new adventure; he is about to be launched 
full  to  the  very  edges  and  every  shelf  was  put  to  use. 
into  his  own  inner  space,  space  as  immense,  unexplored, 
Occasionally  when  someone,  usually  a  child,  opened  it 
and sometimes frightening as outer space to the astronaut. 
without sufficient caution, an egg would fall out and break 
His every perception will come to him with a new freshness  on the kitchen floor. My grandmother’s response was always 
and, for a time, seem startlingly __________. For anyone  the same. She would look at the broken egg with satisfaction. 
who can see things for himself with a naked eye becomes,  “Aha,” she would say, “today we have a sponge cake!”
for a moment or two, something of a genius. With another 
(D)
human being present vision becomes double vision, inevitably. 
We are busy wondering, what does my companion see or  I had turned toward her in shock, but she did not cuddle 
or soothe. Instead she reached out and took me by the hand. 
think of this, and what do I think of it? The original impact 
“We will make a sponge cake,” she told me firmly. It has taken 
gets lost.
many years to find the recipe, the one that is my own, but 
“Music I heard with you was more than music.” Exactly. 
I knew in that moment that this was what I needed to do.
And therefore music ‘itself’ can only be heard alone. Solitude 
*cuddle: 
꼭 껴안다
is the salt of personhood. It brings out the authentic flavor 
of every experience.
(A)
48. 주어진  글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? 가장 적절한 것은?
 (B)-(D)-(C)  (C)-(B)-(D)  (C)-(D)-(B)
 Finding Oneself through Solitude ① ② ③
①
 (D)-(B)-(C)  (D)-(C)-(B)
 Coping with Loneliness in a City ④ ⑤
②
 The Path to Gaining Double Vision
③ 49. 주어진 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
 An Unexpected Journey into Museums
④
①  나는 할머니가 돌아가신 후에 태어났다.
 Leisure vs. Work: Maintaining the Balance
⑤
②  의사는 내가 불치병에 걸렸다고 알려 주었다.
③  할머니의 냉장고는 항상 가득 차 있었다.
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
④  할머니는 깨진 계란을 불만스럽게 바라보곤 하셨다.
⑤  어머니가 손을 내밀어 나의 손을 잡아 주셨다.
 problematic  confusing  original
① ② ③
④ universal ⑤ similar 50. 주어진 글의 밑줄 친 “We  will  make  a  sponge  cake”의 
문맥상 의미로 가장 적절한 것은?
[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
①  매사에 신중하고 침착하게 행동하자.
(A)
②  건강한 신체는 행복한 삶의 원천이다.
③  화목한 가정 생활은 무엇보다 소중하다.
My  grandmother’s  kitchen  was  overflowing  with  food. 
④  어려움을 긍정적으로 수용하고 극복하자.
She raised her daughters to keep an extra box and bottle 
⑤  성격이 원만해야 타인과의 충돌을 피할 수 있다.
unopened in the cupboard for every bottle and box that was 
in use. Although she died before I was born, I was raised 
by her eldest daughter to do this same thing. Absentminded 
*  확인 사항
as I am, I often find I have accumulated two or even three 
?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
extras of anything in my house.
하시오.
8
81
2012학년도 대학수학능력시험 6월 모의평가 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
제 3 교시
7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 
고르시오.
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
① 창문 청소하기 ② 제품 주문해 주기
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 선택한 조각상 디자인을 고르시오. ③ 구두 닦아 주기 ④ 아버지 선물 고르기
⑤ 쇼핑 채널 알려주기
① ② ③
8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 곳을 
고르시오.
① 어린이집 ② 미용실
④ ⑤
③ 장난감 가게 ④ 옷가게
⑤ 애완동물 용품점
9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
① 가구점 사장-직원 ② 선생님-학부모
2. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [1점] ③ 지하철역 직원-승객 ④ 부동산 중개인-고객
angry envious nervous ⑤ 실내장식 디자이너-집주인
① ② ③
relieved impressed
④ ⑤
10. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
고르시오.
① 컴퓨터 사양과 업무 효율의 관련성 to pick up the car to make a reservation
① ②
② 노트북 컴퓨터 과열 방지 방법 to call the Browns to go grocery shopping
③ ④
③ 컴퓨터 바이러스 예방 대책
to buy some medicine
⑤
④ 노트북 컴퓨터 배터리 관리 방법
⑤ 노트북 컴퓨터 절전 모드 설정 방법
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지원할 직종을 고르시오.
4. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 보건실 청소하기 ② 약 사러 가기
③ 담임선생님에게 전화하기 ④ 피자 배달하기
①
⑤ 병원에 데려다 주기
②
③
5. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.  [3점] ④
⑤
$144 $148 $150
① ② ③
$154 $160
④ ⑤
12. 다음을 듣고,  마술 공연에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
6. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
고르시오.
Fantasia Gallery
①   개관 기념으로 열린다.
① 환경 보호 단체 가입을 요청하려고
John Potter
② 콘서트 장소 변경을 공지하려고 ② 카드 마술로 유명한  가 출연할 예정이다.
Stage A 4
③ 공연 중 소란에 대해 사과하려고 ③ 본관  에서 오후  시에 열린다.
Fantasia Gallery
④ 콘서트 취소 사실을 통보하려고 ④ 금일    방문객은 공연관람료 할인을 받는다.
6
⑤ 공연장 내 질서 유지를 당부하려고 ⑤ 세  미만의 아이는 어른이 동반해야 한다.
1
82
외국어(영어) 영역
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점]
  이제 듣기?말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
This is an official notice from KGM, the largest manufacturer 
of digital cameras in the world, regarding the rules of KGM’s 
Big World Competition. First, anyone over the age of 18 is 
eligible,  with  the  exception  of  professional  photographers. 
Second, all photographs must be taken using a KGM camera. 
Third, the size of your image file cannot exceed 100 megabytes. 
① ② ③ ④ ⑤ Finally, entries must be uploaded to our website no later than 
July 25, 2011. Failure to comply with any of the above rules 
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
will disqualify the entry. A list of winners will be posted on 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
the website on August 15, and all winning pictures will be 
Woman:
displayed at the KGM gallery for a period of one year.
I don’t know how to sell the TV.
①
① 전문 사진작가를 모집하려고
It won’t be easy to park in the garage.
②
② 최신형 카메라의 성능을 설명하려고
That’s why the place looks a lot bigger.
③
③ 사진 촬영 시 주의사항을 전달하려고
You paid way too much for the apartment.
④
④ 사진 콘테스트 참가 시 유의사항을 안내하려고
That sofa looks very comfortable to sit in.
⑤
⑤ 카메라 회사의 고객 지원 프로그램을 홍보하려고
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man:
Don’t worry. Go see a doctor and take care.
①
Great job! The design on them looks very nice.
②
Thanks so much. I can pick them up right away.
③
You’re a lifesaver. They’re in a box on my desk.
④
Hurry up. We have to receive them by tomorrow.
⑤
19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
16. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
Lantin decided on a necklace which had been one of his 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
wife’s favorites.  It must be worth at least seven or eight 
①
Woman:
francs  he  thought,  because  for  an  imitation  piece  the 
No problem. What time do you go to work?
① workmanship was very good. He put it in his pocket and went 
Sure. Could you get me something to drink?
② looking for a reliable-looking jeweler. At length he saw 
Okay. How much are you planning to invest?
③
one and went in, a little ashamed of selling something so 
②
Great. Are you the person to talk to about this job?
④
worthless. “Monsieur,” he said to the dealer, “I’d like you to 
Certainly. Can you recommend me to Jack Anderson?
⑤
value  this piece for me if you’d be so kind.” The man took 
③
Elizabeth Roger the article, examined it, turned it over, weighed it, and took 
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장  ④
up a magnifying glass to look at it more closely. Lantin was a 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
little embarrassed by all this ceremony and was about to say, 
Elizabeth:
“Look, I’m pretty sure it’s got no value at all,” when the 
We should put a box here to reuse the paper.
①
jeweler announced: “Monsieur, I’d put it at between 12,000 
Do you know why they moved the copy machine?
②
and 15,000 francs. However, I could not purchase  this from 
How about using recycled ink instead of regular ink? ⑤
③
you without knowing its exact provenance.”
The boss says we need 20 more copies for the meeting.
④
You need to call a mechanic to repair the computer. *provenance: 
⑤ 출처
2
83
외국어(영어) 영역
(A) (B) (C)
20. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장  23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
적절한 것은? Since the 1980’s, zoos have strived to reproduce the natural 
When  induced  to  give  spoken  or  written  witness  to  habitats of their animals, replacing concrete floors and steel 
something they doubt, people will often feel bad about their  bars with grass, rocks, trees, and pools of water. These 
deceit. Nevertheless, they begin to believe (A) what/that they  environments may simulate the wild, but the animals do not have 
are saying. When there is no compelling external explanation  to worry about finding food, shelter, or safety from predators. 
for one’s words, saying becomes believing. Tory Higgins and 
While this may not seem like such a bad deal at first glance, 
①
his  colleagues  had  university  students  read  a  personality 
the animals experience numerous complications.  And yet, 
②
description of someone and then (B) summarize/summarized 
most of the complications were settled with no delay in order to 
it for someone else who was believed either to like or to dislike 
ensure  the  animals’  health  and  safety.  The  zebras  live 
③
this person. The students wrote a more positive description 
constantly in fear, smelling the lions in the nearby Great Cats 
when  the  recipient  liked  the  person.  Having  said  positive 
exhibit every day and finding themselves unable to escape. 
things,  they  also  then  liked  the  person  more  themselves. 
There is no possibility of migrating or of storing food for the 
(C) Asked/Asking to recall what they had read, they remembered  ④
winter, which must seem to promise equally certain doom to a 
the description as being more positive than it was. In short, it 
bird or bear.  In short, zoo life is utterly incompatible with an 
seems that we are prone to adjust our messages to our listeners,  ⑤
and, having done so, to believe the altered message. animal’s most deeply-rooted survival instincts.
*doom:  , 
(A) (B) (C) 파멸 종말
what summarize Asked
① …… ……
what summarize Asking
② …… …… [24~28] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
what summarized Asked
③ …… ……
④ that …… summarized …… Asking 24. The wrapping of Christmas presents, William Waits notes, 
⑤ that …… summarized …… Asked is a fairly recent phenomenon in American life. It arose at the 
turn of the 20th century, during a period when hand-made 
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은? presents  were  giving  way  to  machine-made,  store-bought 
We want to stop watching so much TV, but demonstrably,  ones. For both givers and manufacturers, this shift presented a 
we also want to watch lots of TV. So what we really want, it  problem, for the machine-made items, precisely because they 
seems,  is to stop wanting. We  are trapped deep in a  were  convenient,  represented  less  of  the  giver’s  personal 
① ②
paradox: deciding on the best course of action, then doing  attention than the hand-made items had done; thus they were 
something else. The way around this is ③to see that habits  symbolically less intimate. To disguise this loss of symbolic 
are responses to needs. This sounds ④obvious, but countless  value, and to invest the manufactured items with a personal 
efforts  at  habit  change  ignore  its  implications.  If  you  eat 
touch, retailers encouraged shoppers to have their purchases 
badly, you might resolve to start eating well. However, if you 
gift-wrapped. Gift-wrapping, in Waits’s acute term, became a 
are eating burgers and ice-cream to feel comforted, relaxed 
‘decontaminating mechanism’ that removed the presents from 
and happy,  try to replace them with broccoli and carrot 
⑤ the ‘normal flow of bought-and-sold goods’ and made them, 
juice is like dealing with a leaky bathroom tap by repainting 
for a single ceremonial moment, emblems of   rather 
the  kitchen.  What  is  required  is  not  a  better  diet,  but  an 
than commerce.
alternative way to feel comforted and relaxed.
*emblem: 
상징
intimacy disguise generosity
22. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? ① ② ③
convenience encouragement
A way to get things done more efficiently and get better  ④ ⑤
results is to do the right thing at the right time of day. Know 
your own body rhythm, respect your internal clock, and pay  25. Some people tend to be late as a general rule, whether they 
attention to how your energy level ebbs and flows during the  are busy or not. To stop being late, all one has to do is change 
day. If you have lots of energy early in the morning, that is 
the motivation by deciding that in all circumstances being 
when you should schedule difficult activities, whether for you 
on  time  is  going  to  have  first  priority  over  any  other 
these are brainstorming, writing, or practicing. Use the same 
consideration. Presto! You will never have to run for a plane 
principle  in  planning  activities  for  your  team.  Schedule 
or miss an appointment again. As a lifelong latecomer, that is 
intervals of productive time and breaks so that you get the most 
how I cured myself. Having made the decision that   
from people. I always ask people to respect their own body 
was now of major importance, I found that answers came 
rhythms when scheduling appointments. In my experience, 
automatically to such questions as “Can I squeeze in one more 
most people are far more productive in the morning, but there 
errand before the dentist?” or “Do I have to leave for the 
are those who differ and hit their stride later in the day.
airport now?” The answers are always no, and yes. Choosing 
① 업무 성과를 높이기 위해 오후 근무시간을 늘려라. to be on time will make your life enormously easier, and that 
② 신체리듬에 따라 일할 수 있도록 배려하라. of your family, friends, and colleagues as well.
③ 업무의 특성에 따라 계획을 효과적으로 세우게 하라.
harmony precision promptness
① ② ③
④ 어려운 일은 공동 작업을 통해 해결하게 하라.
consistency thriftiness
⑤ 적절한 휴식 간격을 유지함으로써 신체리듬을 조절하게 하라. ④ ⑤
3
84
외국어(영어) 영역
26. The hazards of migration range from storms to starvation,  [29~30] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 
but they are outweighed by the advantages to be found in the 
고르시오.
temporary superabundance of food in the summer home. The 
process of evolution ensures that a species migrates only if it  29. When you are picking out products in the grocery store, 
searching for the best possible strawberry jam, you are trying 
pays it to do so. Birds of the same species may be migratory 
to maximize your own enjoyment. You are the only person 
in  one  area,  but  sedentary  elsewhere.  Most  song  thrushes 
that matters; it is your sense of pleasure that you are trying to 
migrate from northern Scotland; but in the south of England, 
please. In this case,  (A)  is the ideal strategy. You 
the balance of advantage against disadvantage is so delicate 
should listen to those cells in the brain that tell you what you 
that while some migrate to Spain and Portugal, the majority 
really want. However, when you are making a moral decision, 
normally     over winter. Moreover,  this egocentric strategy backfires. Moral decisions require taking 
England’s winters have been getting warmer since the late  other people into account. You cannot act like a greedy brute 
1980’s and if the trend continues it is likely that our song  or let your anger get out of control. Doing the right thing 
thrushes will become increasingly sedentary. means thinking about  (B) , using the emotional 
brain to mirror the emotions of strangers. Selfishness needs to 
*sedentary:     **thrush: [ ] 
이주하지 않는 조류 개똥지빠귀 be balanced by some selflessness.
suffer from a scarcity of food
① *backfire: 
역효과를 낳다
do not lay eggs
② (A) (B)
stay in England
③ selflessness your neighbors
① ……
fly back to Scotland selflessness utmost justice
④ ② ……
migrate somewhere north of England self-esteem genuine happiness
⑤ ③ ……
selfishness eternal beauty
④ ……
selfishness everybody else
27. Some people believe that     is some kind  ⑤ ……
of instinct, developed because it benefits our species in some 
30. We tend to consider ourselves as rational decision makers, 
way. At first, this seems like a strange idea: Darwin’s theories 
logically evaluating the costs and benefits of each alternative 
of evolution presume that individuals should act to preserve 
we encounter.  (A) , we are much more primitive than 
their own interests, not those of the species as a whole. But  most assume. A team of economists looked at how consumers 
the British evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins believes  reacted  to  various  pitches  by banks  to  take  out  a  loan.  A 
that natural selection has given us the ability to feel pity for  purely rational view would have predicted that interest rates 
someone  who  is  suffering.  When  humans  lived  in  small  would be the only factor that had an impact. But the scientists 
varied more than just the interest rate; they also tested how 
clan-based groups, a person in need would be a relative or 
persuasive  other  approaches  might  be.  (B) ,  some 
someone who could pay you back a good turn later, so taking 
letters offered a chance to win a cell phone in a lottery if the 
pity  on  others  could  benefit  you  in  the  long  run.  Modern 
customer came in to inquire about a loan. They found that 
societies are much less close-knit and when we see a heartfelt 
such an offer increased loan inquiries by as much as dropping 
appeal for charity, chances are we may never even meet the 
the interest rate five points. For a $50,000 loan, this meant 
person who is suffering―but the emotion of pity is still in  some customers were in essence willing to pay $16,000 more 
our genes.  [3점] in interest to receive a $100 cell phone.
not wanting to suffer giving to charity (A) (B)
① ②
drawing pity from others exploring alternatives However For instance
③ ④ ① ……
⑤ pursuing individual interests ② However …… Moreover
Furthermore In contrast
③ ……
Likewise In other words
④ ……
28. Essentially, your reputation is your most valuable asset― Likewise Consequently
⑤ ……
so guard it well. But do not be terribly demoralized if you make 
some mistakes along the way. With time it is possible to repair 
31. 다음 글에 드러난 버스 승객들의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
a stained reputation. Every experience you have with someone 
It is the end of a long, tiring day at Walt Disney World, and a 
else  is  like  a  drop  of  water  falling  into  a  pool.  As  your 
busload of parents and children are starting the twenty-minute 
experiences with that person grow, the drops accumulate and 
ride back to their hotel. The children are overstimulated and 
the pool deepens. Positive interactions are clear drops of water 
annoyed, and so are the parents. Everyone is whiny. It is a bus 
and negative interactions are red drops of water. But they 
ride  from  hell.  Then,  rising  above  the  unpleasant  buzz  of 
are not equal. That is,     , and 
complaining  children  and  parents,  comes  a  thin,  persistent 
that number differs for different people. Those who are very 
melody: The bus driver has started to sing the song ‘Under the 
forgiving only need a few positive experiences―clear drops Sea’ from the movie The Little Mermaid. Everyone begins to 
to  dilute  a  bad  experience,  while  those  who  are  less  quiet down and listen. Eventually a little girl joins in, then 
―
forgiving need a lot more to wash away the red. several more children. By the end of the ride everyone is 
  [3점]
singing ‘The Circle of Life’ from the movie The Lion King. 
a number of clear drops can dry up with time
① The bus ride from hell has become the pleasurable, song-filled 
a drop of red water can lead your life to ruin end to a full day.
②
③ a number of water drops can affect your experience ① irritated → delighted ② ashamed → grateful
a number of red drops can accumulate gradually excited depressed amused frightened
④ ③ → ④ →
a number of clear drops can dilute one red drop relaxed perplexed
⑤ ⑤ →
4
85
외국어(영어) 영역
(A) (B) (C) historical perspectives on Japanese customs
32. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  ①
difficulty of altering tea-drinking habits
적절한 것은? ②
various factors influencing customer preference
③
Back in the 1870’s, Sholes & Co., a leading manufacturer of 
health benefits of drinking green tea
typewriters  at  the  time,  received  many  (A) complaints/ ④
cultural difference in dealing with customer requests
compliments  from  users  about  typewriter  keys  sticking  ⑤
together if the operator went too fast. In response, management 
asked its engineers to figure out a way to prevent this from 
35. After a stressful day, how do you wind down and clear your 
happening. The engineers discussed the problem and then one 
mind?  Relaxing  in  a  comfortable  chair,  putting  on  some 
of them said, “What if we (B) turned/slowed the operator 
soothing sounds, and reading something light and entertaining 
down? If we did that, the keys would not jam together nearly 
as  much.”  The  result  was  to  have  an  inefficient  keyboard  are all good methods to get ready for some restful sleep. But as 
configuration. For example, the letters ‘O’ and ‘I’ are the third  you ease your exhausted senses, do not forget your sense of 
and sixth most frequently used letters in the English language,  smell. Certain aromas can fill you with feelings of tranquility, 
and yet the engineers positioned them on the keyboard so that  and research has found that lavender, vanilla, and green apple 
the relatively weaker fingers had to depress them. This ‘inefficient  are among the best smells to help lower anxiety and induce 
logic’ pervaded the keyboard, and (C) triggered/solved the  sleep. You can use essential oils of these scents by applying 
problem of keyboard jam-up. them to the back of your neck or the inside of your wrist. Even 
better, indulge in a warm bath with these oils dissolved in the 
(A) (B) (C)
water. Before bed, you might enjoy a glass of hot soy milk with 
complaints turned triggered
① …… …… natural vanilla flavoring for a calming effect inside and out.
complaints slowed triggered
② …… ……
usefulness of aroma for restful sleep
③ complaints …… slowed …… solved ①
factors inhibiting good sleep
④ compliments …… slowed …… solved ②
origins of aromatic stress-relievers
⑤ compliments …… turned …… solved ③
reasons for stress and fatigue
④
ways of extracting various essential oils
⑤
33. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
않은  것은?
According to Cambodian legends, lions once roamed the  36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
countryside attacking villagers and their precious buffalo, and 
long before the great Khmer Empire began in the 9th century, 
farmers developed a fierce martial art to defend themselves 
against  the  predator.  These  techniques  became  bokator. 
①
Meaning ‘to fight a lion,’ bokator is a martial art  depicted 
②
on  the  walls  of  Angkor  Wat.  There  are  10,000  moves  to 
master,  mimicking animals such as monkeys, elephants and 
③
even  ducks.  King  Jayavarman  VII,  the  warrior  king  who 
united Cambodia in the 12th century, made his army train in 
bokator, turning it into a  fearsome fighting force. Despite 
④
its long tradition in Cambodia, bokator  flourished when the 
⑤
Khmer Rouge took power in 1975 and executed most of the 
discipline’s masters over the next four years.
[34~35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. The graph above shows the types of websites people use 
when  they  look  for  new  information  online.  The  most 
34. While  in  Japan,  I  ordered  green  tea  with  sugar  at  a  ①
preferred type of websites is Search Engines, whereas the least 
restaurant. A waiter politely explained that one does not drink 
preferred type of websites is Facebook, Myspace, Twitter, etc. 
green tea with sugar. I responded that I was aware of this 
The combined percentage of the two most preferred types 
custom but I liked my tea sweet. The waiter took up the issue  ②
of websites is seventy one.  While there is only a three 
with the manager. After a lengthy conversation, the manager  ③
percent difference between the top two most preferred types of 
came over and said, “I’m very sorry. We don’t have sugar.” 
websites, there is more than a twenty percent gap between the 
Disappointed, I changed my order to a cup of coffee, which 
the waiter soon brought over. Resting on the saucer were two  second and the third most preferred types of websites. ④The 
packets of sugar. My failure to obtain a cup of sweet green tea  three least preferred types of websites are Wikipedia, Blogs, 
was due to a fundamental difference in our ideas about choice.  and Facebook, Myspace, Twitter, etc.  When the percentages 
⑤
In  America,  a  paying  customer  has  every  right  to  have  a  of the types of websites in Social Media are combined, the 
request met. But from a Japanese perspective, it is their duty  result exceeds the percentage of Sites Dedicated to a Specific 
to protect those who do not know any better. Area by ten percent.
5
86
외국어(영어) 영역
Guillaume de Machaut
37. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? ① 역경을 예상하면서 기대치를 현실에 맞춰야 행복해진다.
② 완벽한 삶은 고난을 극복하는 과정에서 찾아온다.
Guillaume de Machaut, who was famous as both a musician 
and a poet, was born in the French province of Champagne. He  ③ 타인의 입장을 이해하는 것이 행복의 출발점이다.
studied theology and spent much of his life in the service of  ④ 신체적 고통을 치유하려면 마음의 평화를 찾아야 한다.
various royal families. Around 1323, he became secretary and  ⑤ 행복하려면 큰 목표를 세우고 끊임없이 도전해야 한다.
chaplain to John, king of Bohemia, whom he accompanied on 
trips and military campaigns throughout Europe. In his later 
years he lived mainly in Reims, where he served as a church 
official.  Machaut  traveled  to  many  courts  and  presented  40. The Greek philosopher Socrates observed, “The unexamined 
beautifully decorated copies of his music and poetry to his  life is not worth living.” For most people, however, reflection 
noble patrons. These copies make Machaut one of the first 
and self-examination do not come naturally. As much as any 
important composers whose works have survived. The decline 
other kind of thinking, reflection requires solitude. Distraction 
of  the  church  in  the  fourteenth  century  is  reflected  in 
and reflection simply do not mix. It is not the kind of thing 
Machaut’s output, which consists mainly of courtly love songs 
you can do well near a television, while the phone is ringing, 
for one to four performers.
or with children in the same room. One of the reasons I have 
① 신학을 공부한 후 일생 동안 평민을 위해 봉사했다. been able to accomplish much and keep growing personally is 
1323 Bohemia
② 년경    왕이 되어 전쟁에 참여하였다. that  I  have  not  only  set  aside  time  to  reflect,  but  I  have 
Reims
③ 에 사는 동안에는 교회 활동을 하지 않았다. separated myself from distractions for short blocks of time: 
④ 귀족 후원자들에게 자신의 음악과 시의 사본을 주었다.
thirty minutes in the spa; an hour outside on a rock in my 
14
⑤ 세기 교회의 부흥이 그의 작품 속에 반영되어 있다.
backyard; or a few hours in a comfortable chair in my office. 
?
The place does not matter as long as you remove yourself 
Bloodhound Car
38. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
from distractions and interruptions.
What’s  faster  than  a  speeding  bullet  and  isn’t  named 
Superman? The answer is the Bloodhound Car, or soon will  ① 자기성찰을 위해 방해받지 않는 혼자만의 시간이 필요하다.
be. Now being built in England, it is expected to be completed  ② 명상과 자기성찰을 통해 자연으로 돌아가야 한다.
within a year. Powered by three engines, it is designed to go  ③ 현대 문명의 다양한 혜택들은 자유로운 사색에 방해가 된다.
1,050 miles per hour (mph), which would blast past the current  ④ 장소에 따라 명상과 자기성찰에 필요한 시간이 달라진다.
land speed record of 763 mph, set in 1997. It is 13 meters long, 
⑤ 자기성찰은 고대 그리스 철학에 대한 탐구로부터 시작된다.
1.5 meters wide and 2 meters tall, and weighs 6.4 tons. Due to 
its enormous weight, it won’t be the quickest car in the world 
from 0 to 100 mph, as it will take 15 seconds. But after that, it 
will only take 25 seconds to go from 100 to 1,000 mph! The 
[41~42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Bloodhound  Car  is  scheduled  to  make  its  record-breaking 
attempt in 2013 at the Hakskeen Pan Desert in South Africa.
41. Virtuoso violinist Pinchas Zukerman was giving a master 
England class to a group of young artists who had come to the Aspen 
① 현재  에서 제작되고 있다.
1,050 Music Festival from all over the world. The auditorium was 
② 시속  마일로 주행이 가능하도록 설계되어 있다.
100 filled  with  aspiring  artists,  distinguished  teachers,  and 
③ 출발 후 시속  마일에 도달하는 시간이 세계에서 가장 짧을 것이다.
100 1,000 25 well-known performers; the atmosphere was competitive and 
④ 시속  마일에서  마일로 높이는 데  초가 걸릴 것이다.
Hakskeen Pan Desert electric. As each performer played, Zukerman offered friendly 
⑤ 에서 기록 경신에 도전할 예정이다.
advice  and  encouragement,  invariably  picking  up  his  own 
violin  to  demonstrate  finer  points  of  technique.  The  last 
[39~40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
musician performed brilliantly. When the applause subsided, 
39. Here is a surprise for you: Being happy means that you  Zukerman complimented the artist, then picked up his own 
realize  that  there  are  times  that  you  will  be  unhappy  and  violin, tucked it under his chin, paused a long moment, and 
recognize that life sometimes stinks. What is uplifting in those 
then, without playing a note or uttering a word, he placed the 
times is appreciating life and facing the challenges that come 
instrument  back  in  its  case.  The  audience  responded  with 
with it, realizing that you are facing challenges fellow humans 
deafening  applause,  in  recognition  of  this  master  musician 
have also faced. We are not saying you should lower your 
who could pay so gracious a compliment.
expectations for your so-called perfect life or downsize your 
goals; we just believe that if you can align your expectations   *virtuoso:  ,     **subside: 
대가 거장 잠잠해지다
with reality a little more by expecting to face challenges, you 
A Long Road to Perfection
①
will be better off in the end. There is an interesting biological 
Zukerman’s Rise to Fame
reinforcement for this notion, too: Your levels of C-reactive  ②
Great Musicians from Aspen
protein (a marker of damaging inflammation) have been shown  ③
to be higher when you have expectations that are unattainable. A Master’s Extraordinary Praise
④
*align: ( )     **inflammation:  Violinists: Technique or Passion?
일직선으로 맞추다 염증 ⑤
6
87
외국어(영어) 영역
42. Whenever you stand on a scale in your bathroom or place a  44. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
melon  on  a  scale  at  the  grocery  store,  you  are  measuring 
weight.  An  object’s  weight  is  the  force  exerted  on  it  by  But when ice forms, they can walk out to a hole near 
gravity,  usually  the  earth’s  gravity.  When  you  stand  on  a  where the seals are swimming, then sit and wait for a seal 
to pop its head up to breathe.
bathroom scale, the scale measures just how much upward 
force it must exert on you in order to keep you from moving 
Across the Arctic, polar bear numbers are in decline. If the 
downward toward the earth’s center. As in most scales you will 
climate continues to warm at the current rate, the bears could 
encounter, the bathroom scale uses a spring to provide this 
disappear completely in the next hundred years. ( ) But 
①
upward support. If you are stationary, you are not accelerating, 
for  now,  if  you  visit  Churchill,  Canada  in  October  or 
so  your  downward  weight  and  the  upward  force  from  the 
November, it’s almost a sure thing you’ll see a polar bear in 
spring must cancel one another; that is, they must be equal in 
the wild. ( ) Churchill, population 914, sits on the edge of 
②
magnitude but opposite in direction so that they sum to zero 
Hudson  Bay  at  the  point  where  the  ice  first  forms  every 
net force. winter. And these bears love ice. ( ) Their fondness for 
③
frozen seas is simple: Ice means they can eat their favorite 
Selecting a Good Scale
①
meal seals.  ( )  Although  polar  bears  are  powerful 
― ④
The Best Way to Measure Your Weight
②
marine  mammals,  able  to  swim  a  hundred  miles  or  more 
Weight: Two Forces in Balance
③ nonstop, they’re too slow to catch a seal in open water. ( ) 
⑤
The Earth’s Gravity: A Mysterious Power
④ Or as a bear might put it, “Dinner is served.”
How to Control Your Weight
⑤
(A)
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Behavioral evidence for separate types of taste receptors 
comes from studies of the following type: Soak your tongue 
for 15 seconds in a sour solution, such as unsweetened 
lemon juice. Then try tasting some other sour solution, such 
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
as dilute vinegar. You will find that the second solution 
tastes less sour than usual. Depending on the concentrations 
A few years ago we purchased a brand-new camper van. 
of the lemon juice and vinegar, the second solution may not 
Not long after we bought our camper, a friend of ours  taste  sour  at  all.  This  phenomenon,  called  adaptation, 
asked  if  her  family  could  borrow  it.  We  were  not  too  reflects the fatigue of receptors sensitive to sour tastes. 
interested  in  loaning  out  our  spotless  camper,  so  we  Now try tasting something salty, sweet, or bitter. These 
declined. substances taste about the same as usual. In short, you 
experience  little  cross-adaptation reduced  response  to 
―
one taste after exposure to another. Evidently, the sour 
(A) That in itself would not have been so bad had it not been 
receptors  are  different  from  the  other  taste  receptors. 
for the mice. Mice were attracted by the food and they 
Similarly, you can show that salt receptors are different 
shredded all the curtains, screens, and cushions. Had we 
from the others and so forth.
let  the  friend  borrow  the  camper,  she  would  have 
discovered the boxes before the mice did.
(B) This happened in the fall, and we stored the camper in our 
The fact that the intensity of a taste is  (A)  after trying 
backyard all that winter. In the spring my husband and I  the same taste, but not after trying a different taste, serves 
were setting it up to prepare for a trip. as evidence for the existence of  (B)  receptors for 
different tastes.
(C) We were very surprised to find that we had left cookie 
boxes in the camper over the winter. We had moved and 
(A) (B)
had a baby that previous summer and fall, and cleaning 
increased adaptive
① ……
out the camper had been overlooked.
increased identical
② ……
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) measured sensitive
① － － ② － － ③ ……
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B) decreased distinct
③ － － ④ － － ④ ……
(C) (B) (A) decreased collective
⑤ － － ⑤ ……
7
88
외국어(영어) 영역
[46~48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. [49~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
My sister, Tara, was the quiet one in the family. She was 
not as adventurous as my brother and I. She never excelled at  I observe the moon wherever I go. What phase is it in, I 
school or sports. Of course, I loved my sister, but, at times, 
wonder?  When  will  it  reach  the  full  moon  phase?  Now 
that was not so easy to do. She seldom made eye contact 
imagine what happened to me recently when I was teaching 
with me. When we ran into each other at school, (a)she 
in  Australia,  12,000  miles  from  my  hometown  in  North 
sometimes pretended not to recognize me.
America. Shortly after my arrival, seeing that the skies were 
One  day,  my  father’s  job  forced  us  to  move  to  a  new 
cloudy,  I  checked  the  newspaper  for  a  weather  report. 
neighborhood. The nurse at our new school, Emerson, gave 
Typically, the weather page also gives times for sunrise and 
us ear and eye exams, our first ever. I aced the tests “Eagle 
―
sunset as well as moonrise and moonset.
eyes and elephant ears,” the nurse said but Tara struggled 
―
to  read  the  eye  chart.  (b)She  declared  Tara  severely 
(B)
shortsighted and she had to get glasses. When the glasses 
were ready, we all went downtown to pick them up. The first 
Picture my surprise when I discovered that the illustrations 
time she tried them on, she kept moving her head around and 
in  the  newspaper  were,  by  my  experience,  wrong.  The 
up and down. “What’s the matter?” I asked. “You can see that 
waxing moon appeared to be illuminated on the left side 
tree over there?” she said, pointing at a sycamore tree about a 
rather than the right side as I had always known it to be. “I 
hundred feet away. I nodded. (c)She sobbed, “I can see not 
must call the newspaper,” I thought. But I continued to study 
just the branches, but each little leaf.” Tara burst into tears.
the images in the newspaper and then consulted a globe.
On the way home, she kept seeing for the first time all 
these things that most everyone else had stopped noticing.  *wax: (점점) 커지다
She read street signs and billboards aloud. She pointed out 
(C)
sparrows  sitting  on  the  telephone  wires.  At  home,  Tara 
insisted that I try on her glasses. I put them on, and the world  The point is that often we do not see things as they are. 
turned into fuzzy, unfocused shapes. I took a few steps and 
Instead, we see things as we are. That is why it is necessary 
banged  my  knee  on  the  coffee  table.  It  was  at  that  very 
in science to have many people making many observations 
moment  that  I  truly  understood  Tara  for  the  first  time.  I 
of  the  same  phenomenon.  I  am  sure  that  to  people  in 
realized why (d)she did not like to go exploring, or why she 
Australia,          .
did not recognize me at school.
Tara loved seeing the world clearly. Not long after she got 
(D)
her  glasses,  she  decided  she  wanted  to  be  an  artist.  She 
started compulsively drawing and painting all the wondrous  When I imagined myself standing on a spot in the southern 
things she was discovering. (e)Her first painting of the  hemisphere, the answer came to me. Here, indeed, south of 
sycamore tree is still her favorite. Today, she is an art teacher  the equator, the waxing moon appears to be on the left. Try 
at Emerson, where she tries to bring the best out of each 
this in your imagination, and you will see it, too.
individual student.
(A)
49. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
가장 적절한 것은?
Seeing with Inner Eyes
① (B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
① － － ② － －
Sisters in a Flood of Tears
② (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③ － － ④ － －
Wearing the Wrong Glasses
③ (D) (C) (B)
⑤ － －
A New World Through Glasses
④
Alternative Ways to Be an Art Teacher
⑤
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(a) (e) solar energy would play an important role
47. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? ①
the waxing of the moon would be easier to notice
②
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
① ② ③ ④ ⑤ the weather in North America appears better than it is
③
the scientific discoveries in North America are universal
④
48. 위 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
the moon in North America would seem strange as well
⑤
(I)
① 화자 는 아버지의 직장 때문에 이사하게 되었다.
Tara
② 는 시력검사에서 근시판정을 받았다.
*  확인 사항
(I) Tara
③ 화자 는  의 안경을 쓰고 잘 볼 수 있었다.
Tara ?답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
④ 는 안경을 쓰게 된 후 화가가 되고 싶다는 마음을 먹었다.
Tara Emerson 하시오.
⑤ 현재  는    학교의 미술교사이다.
8
8