1
① $1.00 ② $1.50 ③ $2.00 ④ $2.50 ⑤ $3.00
1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
8. 다음을 듣고, 두 사람의 역할을 짝지은 것으로 가장 적절한
것을 고르시오.
1. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 가장 좋아하는 연을 고르시오. [1점]
BILL JOANNE
① ② ③
① researcher ----- singer
② entertainer ----- researcher
③ singer ----- master of ceremonies
④ fund-raiser ----- entertainer
⑤ master of ceremonies ----- fund-raiser
④ ⑤
9. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 현 위치에서 산 정상에 도달하는 데
예상되는 시간과 거리가 바르게 짝지어진 것을 고르시오. [3점]
시 간 거 리
2. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. ① about 1 hour ----- about 500 meters
② about 1 hour ----- about 1,000 meters
① pleased ② sad ③ indifferent
③ about 2 hours ----- about 1,000 meters
④ frustrated ⑤ angry
④ about 2 hours ----- about 1,500 meters
⑤ about 3 hours ----- about 1,500 meters
3. 다음을 듣고, 여자가 설명하는 대상으로 가장 적절한 것을
고르시오. 10. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 여자에게 부탁하는 일로 가장 적절한
① 도장 ② 바둑돌 ③ 동전 것을 고르시오.
④ 젓가락 ⑤ 주사위
① 근무 날짜 바꾸기 ② 낚시 함께 가기
③ 숙제 도와주기 ④ 운전 가르쳐 주기
4. 대화를 듣고, 여자가 전화를 걸어 확인한 사항이 아닌 것을 ⑤ 독서 클럽 참가하기
고르시오.
① 전등 끄기 ② 물고기 먹이 주기 11. 다음 여행 일정표를 보면서 대화를 듣고, 남자가 휴가를
③ 수도 잠그기 ④ 화초 물 주기 떠날 요일을 고르시오.
⑤ 가스 밸브 잠그기
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
SUN MON TUE WED THUR FRI SAT
5. 대화를 듣고, 두 사람이 이번 주말에 하기로 한 일을 고르시오.
3Days Dep.
5Days Dep. Dep.
① 나무 심기 ② 양로원 방문하기
7Days Dep. Dep.
③ 집 수리하기 ④ 소방서 일손 돕기
⑤ 강변 청소하기 *Dep.: Departure
1
82
외국어 (영어) 영역 홀수형
12. 대화를 듣고, 남자가 한 말의 내용과 일치하지 않는 것을 17. 다음을 듣고, 젊은이가 제과점 여주인에게 한 말로 가장
고르시오. 적절한 것을 고르시오.
① 처음에는 뉴욕만 방문하기로 했다. Young man: Madam,
② 보스턴에서 역사적 명소를 방문했다.
① your kindness will not be forgotten.
③ 뉴욕에서 박물관을 구경했다.
② thank you. Please have a sample.
④ 보스턴에서 연극을 관람했다.
③ would you happen to know the time?
⑤ 보스턴보다 뉴욕을 선호한다.
④ thank you for being a good student.
⑤ could you show me how to make bread?
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.
이제 듣기·말하기 문제는 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문
제의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
18. 다음 글에서 I 로 의인화된 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I have been working hard so that my family can enjoy
an easy and convenient life. My husband, Shaver, says
that, thanks to me, he can shave quickly in the morning.
① ② ③ ④ ⑤ My son, Snapshot, whose dream is to be the best
photographer, takes me to beautiful places. He even says
14. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 he cant imagine the world without me. My little
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. daughter, Remote, depends on me every time she watches
TV. That s why my family members cherish me. I always
Man:
say to my family, Just remember to plug me in when
① The restaurant is under construction.
you go to bed, so I can wake up in the morning full of
② I cant answer any more questions.
energy.
③ The class was great! Thanks for the book.
① digital camera ② vacuum cleaner
④ I really appreciate your cooperation.
③ rechargeable battery ④ cassette tape
⑤ I havent seen you for ages.
⑤ computer diskette
15. 대화를 듣고, 남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:
19. 다음 글에서 밑줄 친 this의 의미로 가장 적절한 것은?
① Okay, I ll check it out.
For a long time, this irritated me a great deal. I once
② She cant do that.
got a chance to interview one of my favorite comedians,
③ You dont have to apologize.
Mike Myers. After our session was over, he teased me
④ Im fine, thank you.
saying, Wow, you look like youre 11. At the time, I
⑤ I didnt like it, either.
was 26. It was sort of embarrassing, because someone I
had been attracted to told me that I looked like I was in
16. 대화를 듣고, 여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로
elementary school. Six years later, I no longer have that
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
problem. I recently renewed my driver s license and was
Man:
pleased to discover that the picture smiling back at me
looked just like a 32-year-old woman. It has taken a long
① Do you have some time?
time, but I finally look my age.
② Let s get together next week.
③ This is much easier than I thought! ① 인터뷰에 실패한 것 ② 사진을 찍는 것
④ Youre a very good customer. ③ 운전 면허를 갱신하는 것 ④ 유명 인사를 만나는 것
⑤ I think youre in trouble. ⑤ 나이보다 어려 보이는 것
2
83
홀수형 외국어 (영어) 영역
[20∼21] (A), (B), (C) 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현을 골라, [23∼24] (A), (B), (C) 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 어휘를 골라,
짝지은 것을 고르시오. 짝지은 것으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
20. (A) Situating/ Situated at an elevation of 1,350m, the 23. Like all other industries, the rose business must
city of Kathmandu, which looks out on the sparkling (A) adopt/ adapt to changing conditions in the marketplace.
Himalayas, enjoys a warm climate year-round that makes In the past, a florist shop was most likely a local,
(B) living/to live here pleasant. Kathmandu sits almost in independently owned business that bought roses from a
the middle of a basin, forming a square about 5km wholesaler who purchased them from a farmer. On special
north-south and 5km east-west. It was the site of the days like Valentines Day, the cost of a dozen roses rose
ancient kingdom of Nepal. It is now the capital of Nepal twofold or more as a result of high (B) supply / demand .
and, as such, the center of (C) its/ it s government, Today, suppliers of roses include large supermarket chains,
economy, and culture. wholesalers who sell directly at many locations, and direct
telephone marketers. The romance of roses has been
(A) (B) (C)
replaced by (C) economic/ economics realities.
① Situated ----- living ----- its
② Situated ----- to live ----- its (A) (B) (C)
③ Situated ----- living ----- it s ① adopt ----- supply ----- economic
④ Situating ----- to live ----- it s ② adopt ----- demand ----- economics
⑤ Situating ----- living ----- it s ③ adopt ----- supply ----- economics
④ adapt ----- demand ----- economic
⑤ adapt ----- supply ----- economic
24. I have been asked to (A) assist/ resist in creating a
21. Possibly the most effective way to focus on your goals
committee to improve the Sunshine Charity. We are trying
is to (A) write them down/ write down them . Although
to form a strong committee, and I have been asked to
this may sound like an obvious first step, it is a step
request you to join it. I know you will be interested in
that many people ignore. As a result, their goals
the (B) objective/ objection of our committee. We all
often remain unfocused, and therefore unrealized. Go
know how invaluable your advice and help will be. The
to a fairly quiet place where you are not likely to
first meeting will be held here at 11 a.m. next Thursday. I
(B) disturb/ be disturbed . Make a list of every goal you
hope you will be able to come, and that you will agree to
have. Include goals about finances, relationships, and your
(C) sit/ seat on the committee.
career. Be as (C) specifically / specific as possible.
(A) (B) (C)
(A) (B) (C)
① assist ----- objective ----- sit
① write them down --- disturb --- specifically
② assist ----- objection ----- sit
② write them down --- be disturbed --- specifically
③ assist ----- objective ----- seat
③ write them down --- be disturbed --- specific
④ resist ----- objection ----- seat
④ write down them --- disturb --- specifically
⑤ resist ----- objective ----- seat
⑤ write down them --- be disturbed --- specific
25. 다음 글을 쓴 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? [1점]
For the past 25 years you have been a valued and
22. 다음 글에서 밑줄 친 부분 중, 어법상 틀린 것은? respected employee of this company. Since you started in
the mail room in 1979, your contributions to this firm
Falling in love is ①alike being wrapped in a magical
have been invaluable. Your skills led to your being
cloud. The air feels fresher, the flowers smell sweeter,
promoted to executive secretary in 1992. Thus, it is safe
food tastes more delicious, and the stars shine more
to say that without your contributions over the years, we
②brilliantly in the night sky. You feel light and happy
would not be as successful as we have been. On behalf
③as though you are sailing through life. Your problems
of all the executives, we wish you well and hope you
and challenges suddenly seem ④insignificant. Your body
enjoy your well-earned retirement.
feels alive, and you jump out of bed each morning
⑤with a smile on your face. You are in a state of ① to advertise ② to recommend ③ to reject
supreme delight. ④ to warn ⑤ to thank
3
84
외국어 (영어) 영역 홀수형
[26∼29] 다음 글을 읽고, 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것 29. A long time ago, a dissatisfied horse asked the gods
을 고르시오. for longer, thinner legs, a neck like a swan, and a saddle
26. Since it manufactured its first car in 1955, Korea has that would grow upon him. Right away, the merciful
gods changed him into a creature having all the new
grown to be the sixth largest automobile producer in the
features. But although they had looked attractive
world. It is expected to be among the worlds top four
separately, the entire assembly shocked him, for he found
auto-making countries by 2010 after the U.S., Japan, and
that he had been changed into an ugly camel. There
Germany, its competitiveness in small car
now, said the gods, all your wishes are granted, and
manufacturing, skilled human workforce, and leading
you will now live as youve wished all your life.
information technology. With an expected production of
Remember! Not all change is good. You should .
6.5 million units in 2010, Korea will hold 10 percent of
*saddle: 안장
the global auto market.
① admire the beauty of a swan
① in spite of ② contrary to ③ owing to
② be satisfied with what you have
④ regardless of ⑤ in addition to
③ make all your wishes at one time
④ behave as mercifully as the gods
27. Mathematics definitely influenced Renaissance art.
⑤ help the camels dream come true
Renaissance art was different from the art in the Middle
Ages in many ways. Prior to the Renaissance, objects in
[30∼31] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
paintings were flat and symbolic rather than real in
appearance. Artists during the Renaissance reformed 30. Ever since the coming of television, there has been a
painting. They wanted objects in paintings to be rumor that the novel is dying, if not already dead.
represented . Mathematics was used to Indeed, print-oriented novelists seem doomed to disappear,
portray the essential form of objects in perspective, as as electronic media and computer games are becoming
they appeared to the human eye. Renaissance artists more influential. Nowadays, many young people seem to
achieved perspective using geometry, which resulted in a prefer surfing the Internet to reading books. And often
naturalistic, precise, three-dimensional representation of what they seek is not so much profound knowledge as
the real world. The application of mathematics to art, quick information. One may wonder if literary fiction is
particularly in paintings, was one of the primary destined to become an old-fashioned genre to be preserved
characteristics of Renaissance art. in a museum like an extinct species.
① with accuracy ② in a tradition ③ without reality ① 정보 검색에 관한 책자 읽기 ② 인터넷을 활용한 독서법
④ in abstraction ⑤ with symbols ③ 인쇄 매체의 활용 가능성 ④ 고전 작품의 전자 출판
⑤ 인쇄 매체 소설의 위기
28. The number of foreigners interested in the Korean
language has increased dramatically over the past few 31. Painting restorers are highly trained in their techniques,
years because of the success of Korean firms overseas but they would have to be the original painter to know
and growing interest in Korean culture. For example, exactly what to do with the work at hand. Technical aspects
many Chinese students have become interested in Korean of the work, such as dirt removal, are quite straightforward.
as they plan to work for Korean firms, which offer What is important is to bring a painting back to an artist s
better opportunities and pay. The total number of foreign original intent. In order to do so, they have to decide if
students attending Korean language programs has they should add something to the painting or leave it as it
increased to more than 30,000 in Seoul alone this year is. They admit it is extremely difficult to determine what
from about 4,700 at the end of last year. People speaking should and should not be retouched. Our goal is to respect
Korean have long been limited mostly to those from the the artist s intent, but at the same time to make it a visually
peninsula. It is no wonder few people ever imagined that coherent work of art, says Michael Duffy of the Museum
the country s language might one day . of Modern Art in New York.
① provide some enthusiastic technical support ① ways of training painters
② open new opportunities for its modern art ② simplicity of appreciating paintings
③ remain one of the most scientific languages ③ techniques of removing dirt
④ contribute to the return of its ancient culture ④ maintaining the original painters intent
⑤ become popular in the international community ⑤ distinguishing the original from the fake
4
85
홀수형 외국어 (영어) 영역
32. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? 34. Gonzales에 관한 설명 중, 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는
것은?
For centuries, sundials and water clocks inaccurately
told us all we needed to know about time. Mechanical Fueled by a lifelong love of literature, Gonzales has
clocks started appearing on towers in Italy in the 14th
devoted himself to providing people with more access to
century, but their timekeeping was less impressive than literature. When he moved to Marysville, Kansas, after a
their looks, wandering up to 15 minutes a day. By the successful career as a barber in Los Angeles, he noticed
17th century some geniuses, including Galileo and Pascal,
a widespread hunger for reading in the community. He
had theorized about, but failed to build, better timepieces. helped customers read books by opening a library with a
Then, in 1656, Dutch astronomer Christian Huygens collection of 500 books inside his barbershop in 1990.
constructed the first pendulum clock, revolutionizing
Even though many people wanted to read books, they
timekeeping. The precision of Huygens clock allowed had nowhere to turn, said Gonzales. His efforts came to
scientists to use it for their physics experiments, and be recognized nationwide and he won the Livingstone
shopkeepers to open and close at fixed hours. In 1761,
Award in 2003. Mr. Gonzales has helped people find a
Englishman John Harrison perfected a clock that worked shelter for their spirits, wrote the Livingstone
at sea and put accurate time in a navigators pocket. Committee.
*pendulum clock: 추시계
① Los Angeles에서 이발사로 성공했다.
① 14세기 이탈리아에 등장한 시계는 매일 30분 정도 빨랐다.
② 독서에 대한 Marysville 주민들의 열망을 느꼈다.
② Galileo와 Pascal은 정확한 시간을 알리는 시계를 완성했다.
③ 이발관 손님들에게 독서 기회를 제공했다.
③ 추시계는 이탈리아에서 처음으로 개발되었다.
④ 이발관을 처분하고 도서관을 열었다.
④ Huygens의 시계는 물리학 실험에 사용되었다. ⑤ 2003년에 Livingstone 상을 수상했다.
⑤ Harrison이 개발한 시계는 항해 중에 사용할 수 없었다.
33. 다음은 어느 국가의 CO 배출 현황에 관한 도표이다. 도표의
2
내용과 일치하지 않는 것은?
35. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
Every day each of us engages in many types of
complex activities. We may go to school, participate in
sports, drive cars, and sometimes become involved in
conflicts.
(A) Why are some activities, such as eating and
reproducing, common to all organisms, whereas other
activities, such as nest-building, are limited to certain
species? Why do some animals live in groups and
others live alone?
(B) We also perform other, less complex activities such
① CO emissions from commercial and residential as eating and sleeping. Our nervous system
2
heating account for 12% of all CO emissions. determines the complexity of activities that we are
2
② Two-thirds of CO emissions arise from transportation able to perform. Animals with nervous systems
2
similar to a worm s cannot play soccer, much less
and industry.
chess.
③ The percentage of CO emissions is greater from
2
(C) Questions such as these are the focus of the study
power utilities than from transportation.
of behavior. In its simplest form, behavior is the
④ CO emissions from residential heating are equal to
2
conduct of an organism― the way it acts.
one-fifth of those from power utilities.
⑤ Most CO comes from power utilities, industry, and ① (A) - (B) - (C) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
2
transportation; much less comes from commercial and ③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
residential heating. ⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
5
86
외국어 (영어) 영역 홀수형
[36∼37] 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다. 빈칸 38. 다음 글이 묘사하는 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A)와 (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것끼리 짝지은 것은?
Shadows crept across the room, cast from old furniture as
36. [1점] the bright fire made them jump from side to side. The
You may have had this experience. A person calls you winter storm blew against the windows throwing snow high
on the telephone. Apparently assuming you will recognize against the sides of the small log cabin. In the center of
her voice, she does not provide any verbal content which the room was a table with two old silver candlesticks and
would help you identify her. For example, you pick up two glasses of red wine. Soft music played in the
the phone and say, Hello, and the voice on the other background. Between the two wine glasses was a small
end says, Hi, how are you doing? At this point you empty box. It had contained a gold ring with a small
realize you dont know who it is! So you try to extend diamond that his grandmother had given to him. Tonight,
the conversation without admitting your ignorance, hoping the girl across from him was wearing it, beaming.
some verbal clues will be given or that youll eventually
① funny ② scary ③ busy
recognize the callers voice. As a result, you say
④ sad ⑤ romantic
something like, Fine. What have you been up to?
[39∼40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
In the beginning of telephone conversations,
39. How much one can earn is important, of course, but
(A) as well as verbal clues plays important
there are other equally important considerations, neglect of
roles in (B) callers.
which may produce frustration in later years. Where there
(A) (B) is genuine interest, one may work diligently without even
① memory ----- understanding realizing it, and in such situations success follows. More
② emotion ----- persuading important than success, which generally means promotion
③ voice ----- identifying or an increase in salary, is the happiness which can only
④ appearance ----- recognizing be found in doing work that one enjoys for its own sake
⑤ volume ----- avoiding and not merely for the rewards it brings.
① 성공하기 위해서는 성실한 자세가 필요하다.
37. [3점] ② 일의 즐거움에서 얻는 행복이 중요하다.
③ 개인의 이익보다 전체의 이익이 우선한다.
The adult forgets the troubles of his youth. Comparing
④ 성공하면 그에 상응하는 보상이 뒤따른다.
the remembered carefree past with his immediate
⑤ 승진을 위해서는 철저한 자기 관리가 필요하다.
problems, the mature man thinks that troubles belong only
to the present. The twelve-year-old, the adult thinks, does
not worry about salary or professional advancement. 40. Even our most highly educated guesses often go
When the roof leaks, only the parent worries about what
disastrously wrong. Albert Einstein remarked, There is no
contractor to employ or about how he will repair it
chance that nuclear energy will ever be obtainable. Why
himself. To the adult, then, childhood is a time of
is predicting the future so difficult? Would it be smart
freedom. The child, however, wishes always to be a man.
not to try to guess what s coming next? Not predicting
He finds freedom in the future. To him, adulthood is a
the future would be like driving a car without looking
time of wealth, and his father or mother never needs to
through the windshield. We desperately need people who
worry about saving to buy a bicycle.
can foretell the future. They help us narrow the infinity
of possible futures down to one or, at least, a few. We
look at the present and see the present; they see the
Happiness is too seldom found in the present; it is
seeds of the future. They are our advance scouts, going
(A) as a thing of the past or (B) as a part
secretly over the border to bring back priceless
of the future.
information to help the world to come. [3점]
(A) (B) * windshield: 자동차 앞 유리
① compared ----- ignored ① 인간은 미래를 예측할 수 있는 능력을 가지고 있다.
② forgotten ----- succeeded ② 현재는 미래를 예측할 수 있는 기준이다.
③ wished ----- accomplished ③ 미래를 예측할 수 있는 선각자가 필요하다.
④ repaired ----- taken care of ④ 현재에 대한 잘못된 진단은 큰 불행을 초래할 수 있다.
⑤ remembered ----- looked forward to ⑤ 미래에는 정보 수집을 위한 치열한 경쟁이 예상된다.
6
87
홀수형 외국어 (영어) 영역
41. 글의흐름으로보아, 주어진문장이들어가기에가장적절한곳은? 44. 다음 글에 나타난 he의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Before he closed his tired eyes, he let them wander
The doctor also carries out some special tests to
around his old small room. It was made calm by the
detect such dangerous diseases as cancer and diabetes,
glow of the firelight that played on familiar things that
if necessary.
had long been unconsciously a part of him. Now with
Our bodies have the natural ability to fight off bacteria open arms they received him back. He saw clearly how
and diseases when they enter our bodies. ( ① ) But there much it all meant to him, and the special value of a
are other diseases that our bodies cannot successfully resist place like this in ones life. It was good to think he had
on their own. ( ② ) In order to prevent such diseases, it this place to come back to and these things which could
is advised that everyone over the age of twenty-five always be counted upon for the same simple welcome.
should have a regular physical examination. ( ③ ) During
① guilty ② threatened ③ alarmed
a regular examination a doctor checks weight, vision and
④ envious ⑤ comfortable
hearing problems, blood pressure, and so on. ( ④ ) The
information from both check-ups and tests provides
[45∼46] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
important insight into the patient s overall physical
condition. ( ⑤ ) Hence, the time spent on regular
The claim that we have recently entered the
examinations is a sensible investment in good health.
information age is misleading. Flooded by (a) cellphones,
the Internet, and television, we incorrectly imagine that
[42∼43] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. our ancestors inhabited an innocent world where the
news did not travel far beyond (b)the village. It may
42. Moles are dark spots on human skin. They can vary in
not be valid to assume that the media make our time
color from light to dark brown or black. Almost everyone
distinct from the past, because we know relatively little
has at least one mole. According to ancient superstitions,
about how information was shared in the past.
moles reveal a person s character. For example, a mole on
In fact, the Olympics celebrate the memory of
ones nose means that he or she is strong-willed and
(c)the Greek soldier who brought the news of the
trustworthy. Moles are also believed to foretell the future.
Athenian victory over the Persians. Most of us could
Having a mole over ones right eyebrow means he or she
come up with many other examples― (d)message drums,
will be lucky with money and have a successful career. A
smoke signals, church bells, ship flags. But their
mole on the hand, however, is the most desired. It
primitiveness would only confirm our sense that we live
forecasts talent, health, and happiness.
in a fundamentally different world, one of constant,
① Removal of Moles ② What a Mole Tells instant access to information.
③ Origin of Fortunetelling ④ Moles: The Skins Enemy All ages have had a means of sharing information.
⑤ Character and Superstition What makes our time distinct is not the density of the
data we take in. It is the technology that does the
transmitting. Thanks to (e) satellites, we can find out
43. Michelangelo looked at a block of marble and saw a
instantly about events that occur on the other side of the
man. Elffers looks at a lemon and sees a pig. Growing
world. It usually took five weeks for Benjamin Franklin
up in Holland, he was taught to clear his plate; playing
in Paris to receive a letter sent from Philadelphia. But
with food was forbidden. As an adult, the artist visited
the news was still new and surprising to people there.
Japan, where, he recalls, food was almost too beautiful,
and without humor. Food should be a joy. With his
45. 위 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
edible produce sculptures, Elffers hopes to share that joy.
① The value of information depends on speed.
If you give people permission to see the pig in the
lemon, they will forever see animals in fruit or ② We are entering a new age of information.
vegetables, he says. Americans carve pumpkins but they ③ Even old information can benefit all of us.
never use the stem. It s such an expressive nose! He ④ Every age is in fact an age of information.
urges pumpkin buyers to create their own zoos this ⑤ We are flooded by incorrect information.
Halloween. Elffers says, Shop with an open mind.
46. (a)∼(e) 중, 밑줄 친 a means of sharing information에
① Fun with Food ② Cooking with Lemons
해당하지 않는 것은?
③ Humor in Japanese Food ④ Halloween Eating Tips
⑤ Shopping for Health Food ① (a) ② (b) ③ (c) ④ (d) ⑤ (e)
7
88
외국어 (영어) 영역 홀수형
[47∼48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. [49∼50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A)
Perhaps the greatest thing about being a devoted
operagoer is that there is so much room for growth. That spring, I was taken to my first big-league game.
Although you have heard an opera once, you can still hear Just as we approached the exit after the game, I caught
it five or twenty times more. I have heard at least twenty sight of Willie Mays. He was standing near the gate not
performances of my favorite operas, and I would happily ten feet away from me. I rushed to him and said, Mr.
hear them twenty more times. With each rehearing, you Mays, could I please have your autograph? He said,
(A) what you know. The better you know an Sure, kid. You got a pencil? I didnt have one in my
opera, the more you will be challenged by the ideas of pocket. The great Willie Mays stood there watching in
new singers, conductors, directors, and designers. silence. He just shrugged and said, Sorry, kid. And then
Your first experience with Rigoletto and Tosca is only he walked out of the ballpark into the night. I didnt want
your (B) to those masterpieces. Each time you to cry, but tears started falling down my cheeks, and there
hear a different singer in any of the key roles, you are was nothing I could do to stop them.
hearing a new interpretation. Even the same singer will
(B)
vary on two different occasions. Artists grow and change
in their approach to a character based on their own life I was eight years old. At that moment in my life,
experiences and their moods. For example, I saw a nothing was more important to me than baseball. My
famous soprano from Eastern Europe sing Tosca twice team was the New York Giants, and I followed the
within ten months. The first time was a good, honest doings of those men in the black-and-orange caps with all
performance that pleased the audience. The second was the devotion of a true believer. Even now, remembering
(C) . Between the performances, the singer s that team, which no longer exists, I can recite the names
husband had suddenly died. The love scenes in the second of nearly every baseball player on the team. But none
performance seemed much more moving, and her was greater, and none more perfect than Willie Mays.
response to the death of her lover was undeniably
(C)
charming.
After that night, I started carrying a pencil with me
wherever I went. It became a habit of mine never to
47. 위 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
leave the house without making sure I had a pencil in my
① 오페라 가수의 성공은 연기력에 좌우된다. pocket. It s not that I had any particular plans for that
② 오페라는 정신을 수양하는 데 많은 도움이 된다. pencil, but I didnt want to be unprepared. I had been
③ 오페라는 감상할수록 깊은 맛을 느낄 수 있다. caught empty-handed once, and I wasnt about to let it
④ 오페라 가수는 큰 시련을 겪어야 성공한다. happen again. If nothing else, the years have taught me
⑤ 오페라는 여러 요소가 결합된 종합 예술이다. this: If theres a pencil in your pocket, there s a good
chance that one day you ll feel tempted to start using it.
49. 위의 (A), (B), (C)를 이어 하나의 글로 구성할 때, 가장
적절한 순서는?
48. 위 글의 빈칸 (A), (B), (C)에 들어갈 말을 짝지은 것 중
① (A) - (B) - (C) ② (B) - (A) - (C)
가장 적절한 것은?
③ (B) - (C) - (A) ④ (C) - (A) - (B)
(A) (B) (C) ⑤ (C) - (B) - (A)
① define ----- introduction ----- terrible
50. 위 글에서 a pencil이 시사하는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?
② refine ----- introduction ----- impressive
③ define ----- solution ----- impressive ① 문학적 재능 ② 학업에 대한 열망
④ refine ----- solution ----- terrible ③ 건전한 정신 ④ 좋은 운동 기구
⑤ define ----- solution ----- terrible ⑤ 미래에 대한 준비
* 확인 사항
답안지의 해당란에필요한내용을 정확히기입(표기)했는지확인
하시오.
8
81
2013학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
제 3 교시
홀수형
7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적 절한 것을 
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 
고르시오.
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
to prepare dinner for him
① 
 
to buy a new washing machine
1. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 구입할 화분을 고르시오. ② 
  to drop the children off at school
③ 
① ② ③
to call the customer service center
④ 
                  to do the laundry at her parents’ house
⑤ 
 
  8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 
④ ⑤
  곳을 고르시오.
 
①  약국 ②  실험실 ③  보건실
 
④  편의점 ⑤  응급실
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [1점]
9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
proud relaxed angry
①  ②  ③  ①  코치-운동선수   ②  구급 대원-응급 환자
jealous satisfied
④  ⑤ 
③  상담 교사-학부모 ④  경기장 안내원-관람객
⑤  운동 용품 판매원-고객
3. 다음을  듣고,  남자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 
 
고르시오.
10. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  이름이 첫인상에 미치는 영향 
①  인터넷에서 정보 찾기 ②  여행 안내서 사러 가기
②  청중의 이름을 쉽게 기억하는 요령
③  호텔에 예약 확인하기 ④  친구들에게 의견 묻기
③  좋은 연설을 많이 들어야 하는 이유
⑤  지역 정보 책자 발간하기
④  흥미 있는 연설 주제 선택의 중요성
⑤  청중의 이름을 언급하는 효과적인 연설법
11. 다음  표를  보면서  대화를  듣고,  남자가  주문할  모델을 
4. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
고르시오.
①  학교 콘서트 일정 조정하기
②  공공도서관 자원봉사 함께하기
③  학교 축제 때 피아노 반주하기
①
④  강사에게 레슨 가능 여부 알아보기
②
⑤  피아노 연주 기법 동영상 찾아보기
③
④
5. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.
⑤
$27 $36 $40 $45 $54
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
Lovely Cover
6. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  12. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고, 일치하지 않는 것을 
고르시오. 고르시오.
①  벼룩시장 판매자 등록을 홍보하려고 ①  시에서 가장 인기 있는 독서 클럽이다.
30
②  벼룩시장 개장 시간 변경을 공지하려고 ②  개의 그룹으로 나눠진다.
③  불우 이웃을 위한 성금 기부를 장려하려고 ③  한 달에 두 번 회원 집에서 모인다.
④  중고품 재활용의 필요성을 강조하려고 ④  때때로 유명한 작가들을 토론에 초대한다.
⑤  시내 관광 명소들을 소개하려고 ⑤  헌 책을 병원에 기부하는 행사를 개최한다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점] 18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
As  you  are  well  aware,  a  great  tragedy  took  place  in 
our  city  last  week.  Some  faulty  electrical  wiring  led  to  a 
fire  breaking  out  and  eventually  destroying  an  entire 
block  of  homes  in  the  suburbs.  From  the  very  beginning 
 
it  was  fanned  by  strong  winds,  but  it  would  not  have 
spread  so  far  and  so  quickly,  if  our  firefighters  had  been 
able to arrive at the scene in time. Our city has only one 
 
fire station located downtown. Would you please establish 
a  new  fire  station  in  our  area,  since  you  are  mayor  of 
 
our  city?  We  are  in  urgent  need  of  one.  I  look  forward 
to your response.
                 
①  소방서 신설을 건의하려고
①             ②             ③             ④             ⑤ ②  강풍 대비 훈련을 통보하려고
 
③  전기 시설의 교체를 촉구하려고
 
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  ④  소방 시설의 현대화를 제안하려고
 
적절한 것을 고르시오. ⑤  소방관의 조속한 파견을 요청하려고
Ma  n:                                                
  19. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
Trust me. Your brother will love the hat.
① 
It’s important to keep yourself warm in Africa. Ellen Langer learned from her mother how to prepare a 
② 
roast. As a little  girl,  she  would  watch  as  her  mother 
It’s not that difficult. I can teach you how to do it. ①
③ 
cut  off  a  small  bit  from  one  end  of  the  meat  before 
④  I hope I can travel to Africa to meet the child soon.  
placing  it  in  the  roasting pan. As an adult,  she followed 
No problem. You’ll save money by joining the program. ②
⑤ the  same  routine.  How  ever,  a  question  occurred  to  her 
③
one  day.  Why  did  she  have  to  cut  off  the  end  of  the 
15. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  roast?  She  asked  her  mother,  who  just  said  she’d  learned 
적절한 것을 고르시오. to  do  it  from  her  own  mother.  Then  Langer  asked  her 
Woman:                                                 grandmother.  She  explained  that  when  she  was  a  young 
mother,  the  only  roasting  pan  she’d  had  was  too  short 
④
Then, how about meeting up after class?
①  for  a  standard  roast,  so  she  had  to  cut  off  the  end  to  fit 
Well, can you redesign my blog by next Friday?
②  it  into  the  pan.  She’d  long  since  gotten  roasting  pans  in 
No. You may ruin your project if you don’t do it.
③ larger  sizes  and  hadn’t  cut  an  end  off  since.  Yet  for 
Of course! You can rent the DVD from the library.
④ years  both  Langer  and  her  mother  had  mindlessly 
⑤
Exactly! Everyone should have an equal opportunity.
⑤ followed this routine.
16. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  (A) (B) (C)
20. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
적절한 것은?
Man:                                                 
In  many  countries,  amongst  younger  people,  the  habit  of 
So it is! Now I have enough time to finish it. reading  newspapers  has  been  on  the  decline  and  some  of 
①
That’s true! Good presentation skills are important. the  dollars  previously  (A) spent/were  spent on  newspaper 
②
advertising  have  migrated  to  the  Internet.  Of  course  some 
That’s possible. I might be able to hand it in on Tuesday.
③
of  this  decline  in  newspaper  reading  has  been  due  to  the 
I agree. I need to get enough sleep to stay awake in class.
④
fact  that  we  are  doing  more  of  our  newspaper  reading 
You can say that again! We should always do our best.
⑤
online.  We  can  read  the  news  of  the  day,  or  the  latest  on 
business,  entertainment  or  (B) however/whatever news  on 
Ms. Anderson Brian
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이  에게 할 말로  the websites of the New York Times, the Guardian or almost 
가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. any  other  major  newspaper  in  the  world.  Increasingly,  we 
Ms. Anderson:                                         can  access  these  stories  wirelessly  by  mobile  devices  as 
well  as  our  computers.  Advertising  dollars  have  simply 
It’ll take time to make a new friend.
①  been  (C) followed/following the  migration  trail  across  to 
You’d better tell me what happened last week.
②  these new technologies.
You did the right thing by telling him the truth.
③ 
Why don’t you go and tell him that you’re sorry? (A) (B) (C)
④ 
⑤  Don’t you know a friend in need is a friend indeed? ① spent …… however …… followed
spent whatever following
② …… ……
were spent however following
③ …… ……
  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지 were spent whatever followed
④ …… ……
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다. were spent whatever following
⑤ …… ……
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 33
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은? 24. Have you ever heard anyone say of a dog, “Well, he’s 
very  successful  and  lives  in  a  beautiful  house,  but  he’s 
We  take  it  for  granted  that  film  directors  are  in  the 
not very happy”? One reason most dogs are much happier 
game  of  recycling.  Adapting  novels  is  one  of  the  most 
① than  most  people  is  that  dogs  aren’t  affected  by  external 
respectable  of  movie  projects,  while  a  book  that  calls 
circumstances the way we are. I notice that even when it’s 
itself  the  novelization  of  a  film  is  considered  barbarous.  pouring  rain  outside,  my  dogs,  Blue  and  Celeste ,  are  still 
Being a hybrid art as well as a late one, film has always  excited to go for a walk. As soon as I open the front door 
been  in  a  dialogue  with  other  narrative  genres.  Movies  to  look  outside,  they’re  beside  me  in  a  flash,  standing 
②
were first seen as an exceptionally potent kind of illusionist  expectantly,  ready  for  an  adventure.  I  usually  wait  for  a 
 
theatre,  the  rectangle  of  the  screen  corresponding  to  the  break in the downpour, and then we all dash out together. 
The  fact  that  the  ground  is  wet  and  there  are  mud 
proscenium  of  a  stage,  which  appear  actors.  Starting  in 
③  
puddles dotting the landscape                          . 
the  early  silent  period,  plays  were  regularly  “turned  into” 
While  I’m  carefully  picking  my  way  around  the  wet 
films. But  filming plays did not encourage the evolution 
④
                  spots,  the  dogs  are  joyfully  splashing  right  through  them. 
of what truly was distinctive about a movie: the intervention 
They aren’t afraid to get their paws dirty.
of the camera its mobility of vision. As a source of plot, 
―
motivates us to take a shorter walk
ch aracter,  and  dialogue,  the  novel  seemed  more  suitable.  ① 
⑤
stirs great excitement in me
M any  early  successes  of  cinema  were  adaptations  of  ② 
puts the dogs in trouble
③ 
popular novels.
  means nothing to the dogs
④ 
  *proscenium: 앞 무대 ⑤  makes me want to wander around
 
22. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. In  Belding’s  ground  squirrels,  males  leave  home  and 
females mature in their natal area. This male-biased dispersal 
I  watched  the  beautiful  stretch  of  the  shoreline  as  it 
creates  an  imbalance  in  the  way  males  and  females  are 
floated  into  view.  How  wonderful  it  was!  After  two  days 
related  to  those  individuals  around  them females  find 
―
at  sea,  I  finally  saw  the  land  of  infinite  opportunities.   
themselves surrounded by relatives, while males are generally 
There  it  was  before  me―smiling  and  inviting;  it  was  in areas with complete  strangers. This asymmetry translates 
difficult  for  anyone  to  decline  that  invitation.  I  was  full  into  females  who  warn  close  kin  by  emitting  alarm  calls, 
of  great  plans  to  find  success  in  this  unknown  land.  I  while males generally do not emit calls since their dispersal 
had  accepted  a  job  offer  from  Dr.  Gilbert,  who  had  from  their  natal  areas  means  their  blood  kin  typically  do 
opened  a  medical  clinic  at  an  inland  village  last  year.  It  not  benefit  from  such  a  warning.  Further  support  for  the 
 
kinship-based  alarm-calling  hypothesis  includes  Sherman’s 
gave  me  great  pleasure  to  think  about  how  my  dream 
finding  that  in  the  rare  instances  when  females  do  move 
would  become  a  reality.  I  looked  again  at  the  coast.  The 
away from their natal groups and into groups with far fewer 
line  of  distant  mountains  and  shapes  of  houses  were 
relatives, they                                       .
gradually  emerging  through  the  mist.  They  welcomed  me 
end up acquiring the alarm calls of the new group
with endless promises. ① 
make constant attempts to bring their blood kin along
②
excited and hopeful sad and depressed
①  ②  ③ display a tendency to become more active and cooperative
relieved and sympathetic scared and frightened emit alarm calls less frequently than do native females
③  ④  ④
ashamed and embarrassed adopt  a  more  elaborate  defense  mechanism  than  alarm 
⑤  ⑤
calls
[23~27] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 26. By  likening  the  eye  to  a  camera,  elementary  biology 
23. To  say  that  we  need  to  curb  anger  and  our  negative  textbooks  help  to  produce  a  misleading  impression  of 
what  perception  entails.  Only  in  terms  of  the  physics  of 
thoughts and emotions does not mean that we should deny 
image  formation  do  the  eye  and  camera  have  anything  in 
our feelings. There is an important distinction to be made 
common.  Both  eye  and  camera  have  a  lens  that  focuses 
between  denial  and  restraint.  The  latter  constitutes  a 
light rays from the outside world into an image, and both 
deliberate  and  voluntarily  adopted  discipline  based  on  an 
have  a  means  of  adjusting  the  focus  and  brightness  of 
appreciation  of  the  benefits  of  doing  so.  This  is  very 
that  image.  Both  eye  and  camera  have  a  light-sensitive 
different  from  the  case  of  someone  who  suppresses 
layer  onto  which  the  image  is  cast  (the  retina  and  film, 
emotions such as anger out of a feeling that they need to  respectively).  However,  image  formation  is  only  the  first 
present  a  facade  of  self-control,  or  out  of  fear  of  what  step towards seeing.
 
others may think. Such behaviour is like closing a wound  obscure  the  much  more  fundamental  difference  between 
which  is  still  infected.  We  are  not  talking  about  the  two,  which  is  that  the  camera  merely  records  an 
rule-following.  Where  denial  and  suppression  occur,  there  image, whereas the visual system interprets it. [3점]
comes  the  danger  that  in  doing  so  the  individual  Apparent differences in the focusing power of a lens
①
  anger  and  resentment.  The  trouble  here  is  Superficial analogies between the eye and a camera
②
that  at  some  future  point  they  may  find  they  cannot  ③ Contrasts  in  light  adaptation  between  the  retina  and 
film
contain these feelings any longer.
Misunderstandings  of  image  formation  in  the  eye  and 
*facade: 표면, 겉 ④
a camera
①  fades out ②  copes with ③  stores up ⑤ Close  relationships  between  image  formation  and 
soothes overestimates interpretation
④  ⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
27. Recent  evidence  suggests  that  the  common  ancestor  of  (A) (B)
Neanderthals  and  modern  people,  living  about  400,000  for example On the other hand
① ……
years ago, may have already been using pretty sophisticated 
for example As a result
② ……
language. If language is based on genes and is the key to 
therefore As a result
cultural  evolution,  and  Neanderthals  had  language,  then  ③ ……
moreover Likewise
why  did  the  Neanderthal  toolkit  show  so  little  cultural  ④ ……  
change? Moreover, genes would undoubtedly have changed  moreover On the other hand
⑤ ……
during  the  human  revolution  after  200,000  years  ago,  but 
more in response to new habits than as causes of them. At 
 
an earlier date, cooking selected mutations for smaller guts 
and  mouths,  rather  than  vice  versa.  At  a  later  date,  milk 
 
drinking selected for mutations for retaining lactose digestion 
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
into  adulthood  in  people  of  western  European  and  East 
않은  것은?
African descent.                                       . 
                 
The  appeal  to  a  genetic  change  driving  evolution  gets  Researchers have suggested that maintaining good social 
gene-culture  co-evolution  backwards:  it  is  a  top-down  relations  depends  on  two  complementary  processes: 
①
ex planation for a bottom-up process. 
[3점] being sensitive to the needs of others and being motivated 
  Genetic evolution is the mother of new habits to  make  amends  or  pay  compensation  when  a  violation 
①
  Every gene is the architect of its own mutation does  occur.  In  short,  maintaining  good  social  relations 
② 
The cultural horse comes before the genetic cart depends  on  the  capacity  for  guilt.  Martin  L.  Hoffman, 
③   ②
The linguistic shovel paves the way for a cultural road who  has  focused  on  the  guilt  that  comes  from  harming 
④
 
When the cultural cat is away, the genetic mice will play others,  suggests  that  the  motivational  basis  for  this  guilt 
⑤
is  empathetic  distress.  Empathetic  distress  occurs  when 
people  deny  that  their  actions  have  caused  harm  or 
[28~29] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한  ③
pain  to  another  person.  Motivated  by  feelings  of  guilt, 
 
것을 고르시오.
they  are  inclined  to  make  amends  for  their  actions. 
④
28. To  describe  what  happens  to  common  resources  as  a   
Making  amends  serves  to  repair  damaged  social  relations 
result  of  human  greed,  Garrett  Hardin  used  the  example 
and  restore group harmony.
of  an  area  of  pasture  on  which  all  the  cattle-owners  are  ⑤
permitted  to  graze  their  animals  free  of  charge.  Each 
cattle-owner  seeks  to (A) his  gain  and  in  doing  so 
   
 
considers  the  relative  advantage  and  disadvantage  of 
adding  one  more  animal  to  the  herd.  The  advantage  is 
(A) (B) (C)
that  the  cattle-owner  receives  the  whole  of  the  profit  31. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
from  the  sale  of  the  additional  animal.  The  disadvantage 
적절한 것은?
is that the extra grazing contributes to the deterioration of 
Anxiety has a damaging effect on mental performance of 
the  pasture.  However,  the  disadvantage  is  shared  among 
all kinds. It is in one sense a useful response gone awry
all  the  cattle-owners  using  the  pasture,  so  the  individual  ― 
owner  suffers  only  a  fraction  of  the  disadvantage.  an overly zealous mental preparation for an anticipated threat. 
Consequently,  the  advantage  is  bound  to (B) the  But  such  mental  rehearsal  is  (A) disastrous/constructive 
   
disadvantage.  Thus,  it  is  inevitable  that  more  and  more  cognitive static when it becomes trapped in a stale routine 
animals will be brought onto the pasture until overgrazing  that captures attention, intruding on all other attempts to focus 
totally destroys the pasture. 
elsewhere. Anxiety undermines the intellect. In a complex, 
(A) (B) (A) (B) intellectually demanding and high-pressure task such as that 
maximize equal distribute diminish of  air  traffic  controllers,  for  example,  having  chronically 
① …… ② ……
maximize exceed distribute outweigh high  anxiety  is  an  almost  sure  predictor  that  a  person 
③ …… ④   ……
maximize minimize will eventually fail in training or in the field. The anxious 
⑤ ……
are  more  likely  to  fail  even  given  (B) inferior/superior
scores on intelligence tests, as a study of 1,790 students in 
29. In  physics,  scientists  invent  models,  or  theories,  to 
describe  and  predict  the  data  we  observe  about  the  training  for  air  traffic  control  posts  discovered.  Anxiety 
universe.  Newton’s  theory  of  gravity  is  one  example;  also  sabotages  academic  performance  of  all  kinds:  126 
Einstein’s  theory  of  gravity  is  another.  Those  theories,  different studies of more than 36,000 people found that the 
though  they  describe  the  same  phenomenon,  constitute  more  (C) prone/resistant to  anxieties  a  person  is,  the 
very  different  versions  of  reality.  Newton,  (A) , 
poorer his or her academic performance is.
imagined  that  masses  affect  each  other  by  exerting  a 
force,  while  in  Einstein’s  theory  the  effects  occur  through  *go awry: 빗나가다
a  bending  of  space  and  time  and  there  is  no  concept  of 
(A) (B) (C)
gravity  as  a  force.  Either  theory  could  be  employed  to 
describe,  with  great  accuracy,  the  falling  of  an  apple,  but  disastrous inferior prone
① …… ……
Newton’s  would  be  much  easier  to  use.  (B) ,  for  disastrous superior prone
② …… ……
the  calculations  necessary  for  the  satellite-based  global 
disastrous superior resistant
positioning  system  (GPS)  that  helps  you  navigate  while  ③ …… ……
constructive inferior resistant
driving,  Newton’s  theory  would  give  the  wrong  answer,  ④ …… ……
and so Einstein’s must be used. ⑤ constructive …… superior …… resistant
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 55
Great  Salt  Lake
32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  문장은? 34. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 
것은?
The  Great  Salt  Lake  is  the  largest  salt  lake  in  the 
Western Hemisphere. The lake is fed by the Bear, Weber, 
and  Jordan  rivers  and  has  no  outlet.  At  the  close  of  the 
 
Ice  Age  the  entire  region  was  submerged  beneath  a  lake 
of  meltwater,  and  overflow  from  the  lake  flowed  into  the 
Pacific Ocean through the Snake and Columbia rivers. The 
great  climatic  change  the  lake  underwent  and  continued  
evaporation,  exceeding  the  inflow  of  fresh  water,  reduced 
 
the  lake  to  one-twentieth  of  its  former  size.  The  majority 
of  salt  in  the  Great  Salt  Lake  is  a  remnant  of  dissolved 
salts  that  are  present  in  all  fresh  water.  As  the  water 
                 
evaporated,  the  traces  of  dissolved  salts  were  gradually 
concentrated in the shrinking lake.
 The  above  graph  shows  the  total  number  of  researchers 
and  the  number  of  researchers  per  1,000  people  in  the  ①  서반구에서 가장 큰 소금호수이다.
 
Bear Weber Jordan
EAP (economically active population) of Korea from 1997  ②   강,    강,    강에서 물이 유입된다.
 
③  전 지역이 물에 잠긴 적이 있다.
to  2007.  Compared  to  the  previous  year,  both  numbers 
  ①
④  심한 기후 변화와 계속된 증발로 크기가 줄었다.
recorded  each  year  showed  an  increase  except  for  the 
  ⑤  대부분의 소금은 바닷물이 증발하여 남은 것이다.
numbers  recorded  in  1998.  The  highest  annual  growth 
②
in the number of researchers per 1,000 people in the EAP 
[35~36] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
was  recorded  between  2000  and  2001.  From  2004  to 
③ 35. Although praise may encourage children to continue an 
2007 Korea had more than 200,000 researchers each year,  activity  while  an  adult  is  watching,  according  to  recent  
recording  the  largest  number  in  2007.  The  number  of  studies,  they  are  less  likely  to  continue  the  activity  when 
④  
researchers  per  1,000  people  in  the  EAP  in  2007  was  the  adult  leaves  or  to  repeat  the  activity  in  the  future. 
Rather  than  increasing  children’s  commitment  to  positive 
twice  as  large  as  that  in  1999.  The  annual  increase  in 
⑤
behavior,  praise  encourages  children  to  find  ways  to  get 
the  total  number  of  researchers  was  the  largest  between 
future  verbal  “goodies”  from  important  adults.  In  other 
1998 and 1999.  
words, praise is like the large pink icing rose in the center 
of  a  cake.  It  is  appealing  and  at  first  bite  its  sweetness 
tastes  wonderful.  A  couple  more  bites  still  might  taste 
good,  but  it  quickly  becomes  overly  sweet.  It  has  only 
33. Gregorio Dati에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은? one  simple  flavor;  we  soon  tire  of  it  and  if  we  eat  very 
much  at  any  one  time,  we  might  even  feel  slightly  ill.  It 
Gregorio  Dati  was  a  successful  merchant  of  Florence, 
may  provide  some  quick  energy  but  it  provides  no 
who  entered  into  many  profitable  partnerships  dealing  in 
nourishment and doesn’t support growth or health.
wool,  silk,  and  other  merchandise.  His  career,  however, 
especially  early  on,  knew  the  vicissitudes  characteristic  of  ①  칭찬은 어린이에게 장기적으로는 효과가 없을 수 있다.
②  칭찬받는 어린이는 정신적으로 건강하게 성장한다.
Renaissance  business.  For  example,  while  he  was  en 
③  칭찬은 어린이의 바람직한 행동을 유발할 수 있다.
route  to  Spain  as  his  enterprise’s  traveling  partner,  a  role 
④  어린이를 칭찬할 때는 달콤한 언어를 삼가야 한다.
typical  for  young  men,  pirates  robbed  him  of  all  his 
⑤  어린이를 칭찬하는 어른은 일관성을 유지해야 한다.
goods, including a consignment of pearls, and of his own 
clothes.  His  recovery  from  such  losses  followed  in  part  36. What’s  dangerous  about  the  Internet  is,  because  it  has 
the  aura  of  technology  around  it,  it  has  a  totally 
from  four  successive  marriages.  Later  in  life,  he  was 
undeserved  instant  credibility.  The  fact  that  information  is 
honored  to  serve  a  number  of  posts  in  the  city 
conveyed  in  this  high-tech  manner  somehow  adds 
government.  Over  the  years  he  wrote  a  “diary,”  actually 
authority to what is conveyed, when in fact the Internet is 
an  occasional  record  in  which  he  kept  accounts  of  his  a  global  conveyer  of  unfiltered,  unedited,  untreated 
commercial  and  family  life.  Men  of  his  kind  pioneered  information.  It  is  the  greatest  tool  we  have  not  only  for 
this form of writing about the public and private self. making people smarter quicker, but also for making people 
dumber faster. Rumors published on the Internet now have 
*vicissitudes: 파란만장 a  way  of  immediately  becoming  facts.  This  is  particularly 
**consignment: 위탁판매품
true among people who might not themselves have access 
to  the  Internet  but  hear  a  piece  of  news  or  gossip  from 
Florence
①   상인으로서 성공하지 못했다.
the people around them who do have access.
Spain
② 으로 가는 길에 자신의 옷을 제외한 모든 것을 약탈
① 신속한 정보 보급을 위해 인터넷 접근성의 개선이 요구된다.
당했다.
② 인터넷은 근거 없는 소문을 유포하여 사회 불안을 조장한다.
③ 네 번의 잇따른 결혼으로 경제적 손실을 입었다.
③  인터넷은 다양한 정보를 빠르게 제공하는 훌륭한 도구이다.
④  인생 후반에 시 정부에서 다수의 직책을 맡았다.  ④ 인터넷은 지적 능력의 향상과 저하를 동시에 가져온다.
⑤  자신의 가족생활을 매일 기록한 일기를 썼다. ⑤ 인터넷은 검증되지 않은 정보를 사실처럼 믿게 만든다.
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
Like Father, Like Son
[37~38] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. ① 
Want Success? Take a Recess!
37. Why  is  it  difficult  to  find  a  runner  who  competes  ② 
The Myth of the Self-Made Man Is No More
equally  well  in  both  100-m  and  10,000-m  races?  The  ③ 
Stick to Your Genes and Excel!
primary  reason  is  that  our  muscles  contain  two  main  ④ 
types of muscle fibers, called slow and fast muscle fibers.  ⑤  Follow the Best and Succeed!  
Slow  muscle  fibers  are  muscle  cells  that  can  sustain 
repeated  contractions  but  don’t  generate  a  lot  of  quick 
power  for  the  body.  They  perform  better  in  endurance   
exercises,  like  long-distance  running,  which  require  slow, 
steady  muscle  activity.  Fast  muscle  fibers  are  cells    that 
can  contract  more  quickly  and  powerfully  than  slow 
muscle fibers but fatigue m  u  c  h      m  o  r  e easily; they function  40. In  the  early  1990s  Norway  introduced  a  carbon  tax  on 
best for short bursts of intense activity, like weight lifting  emissions  from  energy,  and  it  did  seem  to  encourage 
or sprinting. environmental innovation. However, unexpected circumstances 
 
came  when  they  tried  to  apply  this  approach  globally. 
reasons for runners to develop strong muscles
①  
Agreeing  on  international  taxes  on  emissions  was 
differences between slow and fast muscle fibers
②  
notoriously  hard,  as  we  already  know  that  the  European 
comparison of sprinting with long-distance running
③  Union  has  experienced  terrible  difficulties  in  trying  to 
necessity of building muscles for long-distance runners
④
  regularize  the  complex  and  myriad  differences  in  its 
relationship between muscle fibers and physical fatigue
⑤ members’  sales  taxes.  Besides,  although  Sweden,  Finland, 
and  Denmark  barely  decided  to  introduce  carbon  taxes 
38. Scientists  should  be  careful  to  reduce  bias  in  their  during  the  1990s,  they  have  not  harmonized  their 
experiments. A bias occurs when what the scientist expects   
approaches  with  Norway  or  with  each  other.  If  such 
changes how the results are viewed. This expectation might  similar  countries  can’ t  come  to  an  agreement,  there  is 
cause a scientist to select a result from one trial over those 
little  hope  for  doing  so  with  the  vastly  more  diverse 
from  other  trials.  Scientists  can  lessen  bias  by  running  as 
countries in the rest of the world. 
many  trials  as  possible  and  by  keeping  accurate  notes  of 
Reduce Carbon Emission, Rescue Earth
each  observation  made.  Valid  experiments  also  must  have  ① 
No Exit Out of Fatal Carbon Emissions
data  that  are  measurable.  This  allows  others  to  compare  ② 
Global Carbon Tax: A Long Way to Go
the  results  to  data  they  obtain  from  a  similar  experiment.  ③ 
Carbon Emissions: Not in My Backyard
Most  importantly,  the  experiment  must  be  repeatable.  ④ 
Findings are supportable when other scientists perform the  ⑤  Everlasting Conflict: Taxpayers vs. Collectors
same experiment and get the same results.
necessary conditions of repeatable experiments 
① 
importance of identifying bias in scientific research
② 
requirements for objective scientific experiments
③ 
guidelines for collecting measurable data in experiments
④
41. 다음 글에서 전체의 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
effective strategies for keeping accurate notes on data
⑤ 
Apologies  often  fail.  One  reason  apologies  fail  is  that 
the  “offender”  and  the  “victim”  usually  see  the  event 
[39~40] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
differently.  Examining  personal  narratives,  researchers 
39. I once heard a woman say, “Of course, he’s successful.  have  found  that  those  who  cause  harm  tend  to  minimize 
It’s  in  his  genes.”  I  knew  she  wasn’t  talking  about  me,  the  offense probably  to  protect  themselves  from  shame 
―
because I was wearing shorts. I also knew she was wrong.  and guilt. They also tend to downplay the consequences of 
Success is not in our genes. Not all children of successful  their  actions.  These  tendencies  can  inflame  the  anger 
①
people  become  successful  themselves.  Many  kids  have  of  the  hurt  person,  who,  in  contrast,  may  see  an  offense 
everything going for them and end up total disasters. They  as  bigger  than  it  really  is.  When  sincere  apologies  are 
②
do  none  of  the  things  that  helped  their  parents  succeed.  offered  in  an  ordinary  human  relationship,  they  are 
The  number  of  unsuccessful  people  who  come  from  readily  accepted  by  the  victims  and  reconciliations  ensue. 
successful  parents  is  proof  that  genes  have  nothing  to  do  Those  who  are  hurt  tend  to  see  the  act  as  one  with 
③
with  success.  You  can’t  change  your  genes,  but  you  can  severe  consequences  and  as  part  of  an  ongoing  pattern 
change  the  people  you  imitate.  The  choice  is  up  to  you,  that  is  inexcusable  and  immoral.  Each  person  has  his 
④
so  why  not  imitate  the  best?  There  are  hundreds  of  great  or  her  own  truth,  and  there  is  distortion  on  both  sides. 
people to imitate and copy. They have terrific advice about  Therefore,  to  apologize  sincerely  we  must  first  listen 
⑤
what  helped  them  succeed.  Jot  down  notes  and  carry  attentively  to  how  the  other  person  really  feels  about 
them  around  in  your  pants  pocket.  Then  success  will  be  what  happened not  simply  assert  what  we  think 
―
in your jeans, even if it’s not in your genes. happened.
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 77
42. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? 44.
Despite  such  evidence  of  favoritism  toward  handsome 
When  you  walk  into  a  store,  you  are  besieged  by 
politicians,  follow-up  research  demonstrated  that  voters 
information.  Even  purchases  that  seem  simple  can 
did not realize their bias.
quickly turn into a cognitive quagmire. Look at the jam 
 
aisle. Research  has  shown  that  we  automatically  assign  to 
good-looking  individuals  such  favorable  traits  as  talent, 
(A) Rational  models  of  decision-making  suggest  that  the  kindness,  honesty,  and  intelligence.  ( )  Furthermore, 
①  
way  to  find  the  best  product  is  to  take  all  of  this  we  make  these  judgements  without  being  aware  that 
information  into  account  and  to  carefully  analyz e  the  physical  attractiveness  plays a role in the process.  ( ② ) 
Some  consequences  of  this  unconscious  assumption  that 
different  brands  on  display.  But  this  method  can 
“good-looking  equals  good”  scare  me.  ( )  For 
backfire.                    ③
example,  a  study  of  the  1974  Canadian  federal  elections 
(B) A  glance  at  the  shelves  can  inspire  a  whole  range  of  found  that  attractive  candidates  received  more  than  two 
 
questions.  Should  you  buy  the  smooth-textured  and a half times as many votes as unattractive candidates. 
  ( )  In  fact,  73  percent  of  Canadian  voters  surveyed 
strawberry  jam  or  the  one  with  less  sugar?  Does  the  ④
  denied in the strongest possible terms that their votes had 
more expensive jam taste better? 
  been  influenced  by  physical  appearance;  only  14  percent 
(C) When  we  spend  too  much  time  thinking  in  the  even  allowed  for  the  possibility  of  such  influence.  ( ) 
  ⑤
supermarket,  we  can  trick  ourselves  into  choosing  the  Voters  can  deny  the  impact  of  attractiveness  on 
wrong  things  for  the  wrong  reasons.  Making  better  electability  all  they  want,  but  evidence  has  continued  to 
confirm its troubling presence. 
decisions when picking out jams or bottles of wine is 
 
best done with the emotional brain, which generates its 
verdict automatically. 45. 다음 글의 내용을 한   문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸 (A)와 
(B)
*quagmire: 수렁, 진창 에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) “Why,  in  country  after  country  that  mandated  seat 
①  - - ②  - -
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A)   (B) belts, was it impossible to see the promised reduction in 
③  - - ④  - -
road  accident  fatalities?”  John  Adams,  professor  of 
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  - -
geography  at  University  College  London,  wrote  in  one 
of  his  many  essays  on  risk.  “It  appears  that  measures 
that  protect  drivers  from  the  consequences  of  bad 
[43~44] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
driving  encourage  bad  driving.  The  principal  effect  of 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
seat  belt  legislation  has  been  a  shift  in  the  burden  of 
43. risk  from  those  already  best  protected  in  cars,  to  the 
But now rock radio is in seemingly terminal decline and  most vulnerable, pedestrians and cyclists, outside cars.”
MTV doesn’t show many music videos anymore. Adams started to group these counterintuitive findings 
under  the  concept  of  risk  compensation,  the  idea  that 
Once upon a time, there was only one way to launch a  humans  have  an  inborn  tolerance  for  risk.  As  safety 
features  are  added  to  vehicles  and  roads,  drivers  feel 
hit album: radio. Nothing else reached as many people, as 
less  vulnerable  and  tend  to  take  more  chances.  The 
often.  Getting  on  a  radio  playlist  was  difficult,  but  once 
phenomenon can be observed in all aspects of our daily 
a  song  was  in  heavy  rotation  on  the  radio,  it  had  a  high 
lives.  Children  who  wear  protective  gear  during  their 
probability  of  selling.  Then,  in  the  1980s,  came  MTV, 
games  have  a  tendency  to  take  more  physical  risks. 
which  became  the  second  way  to  create  a  hit.  ( )  It 
① Hikers  take  more  risks  when  they  think  a  rescuer  can 
had  even  more  limited  capacity  for  new  music,  but  its 
access them easily.
influence  over  a  generation  was  unparalleled.  ( )  For  󰀻
②
the music labels, those were good times; it was a brutally 
competitive  business,  but  it  was  a  business  they  knew.   According to John Adams, the phenomenon that safety 
( )  They  understood  the  rules,  and  they  could  earn  measures  (A)   careless  driving  may  be  accounted 
③
for  by  the  notion  that  a  greater  sense  of  security 
their  keep  by  working  them.  ( )  So  how  to  market 
④
(B)  people to take more risks.
music?  ( )  Labels  know  the  answer  lies  online, 
⑤
tapping  the  word-of-mouth  forces  that  are  replacing 
(A) (B) (A) (B)
traditional  marketing  in  creating  demand,  but  they’re  still  contribute to tempts contribute to forbids
① …… ② ……
trying to figure out exactly how best to do it. discourage tempts discourage forces
③ …… ④ ……
*label: 음반사 ⑤ discourage ……forbids
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
(B)
[46~47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Very  shortly  the  carton  seemed  too  small.  I  offered 
What  should  writers  do  when  they’re  teased  by 
him  a  nest  made  of  a  covered  box,  bedded  with  straw 
intriguing  but  elusive  ideas,  by  hints  of  thoughts  that 
and  with  a  round  doorway  cut  in  the  front.  He  knew 
seem  too  vague  to  be  expressed  in  words?  Edgar  Allan 
instantly  that  a  hole  spells  home,  and  (b)he  dashed 
 
Poe’s  advice  is  simple:  They  should  pick  up  their  pens 
inside.  Every  time  I  came  to  feed  him,  he  jumped  into 
(or,  he  might  add  today,  power  up  their  laptops).  Poe  my  lap  as  eagerly  as  ever.  As  the  months  passed,  the 
dismisses  the  argument  that  any  ideas  are  so  deep  or  chuck  grew  bigger  and  bigger.  My  husband  remarked 
 
subtle that they’re “                        .” that  if  I  didn’t  do  something  soon,  I  would  be  chased 
“For  my  own  part,”  he  said  in  an  1846  article  in  around  for  the  rest  of  my  days  by  a  15-pound 
 
Graham’s  Magazine,  “I  have  never  had  a  thought  which  woodchuck begging for milk.
I  could  not  set  down  in  words,  with  even  more 
(C)
                 
distinctness  than  that  with  which  I  conceived  it.”  The 
“mere  act”  of  writing,  Poe  believed,  helps  writers  make  At  home  I  put  him  in  the  bathtub  and  my  husband 
the ir  ideas  not  only  clearer  but  more  logical.  To  use  his  found  a  large  carton.  (c)He  put  cat  litter  in  the  bottom 
phr  ase,  the  process  of  writing  contributes  to  “the  and  straw  on  top  of  that.  When  I  put  the  chuck  in,  he 
gratefully  burrowed  into  the  straw.  I  made  a  mixture  of 
log icalization of thought.”
milk  and  baby  cereal  for  him.  When  I  gave  it  to  the 
Whenever he felt dissatisfied with a vague “conception 
 
chuck,  he  ate  it  greedily.  (d)He  accepted  me  quickly.  If 
of  the  brain,”  Poe  said,  “I  resort  forthwith  to  the  pen, 
  I  put  my  hand  in  the  carton,  he  nibbled  my  fingers.  It 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining,  through  its  aid,  the 
became  clear  that  I  was  imprinting  the  woodchuck  and 
necessary form, consequence and precision.”
vice versa.
Today’s  advocates  of  freewriting  would  probably  agree  *imprint: 강하게 인상지우다
with  Poe  on  this  point.  Sometimes,  the  best  way  to   
(D)
resolve  a  dilemma whether  it’s  a  writing  dilemma  or 
―  
a thinking dilemma is simply to start writing.
― I decided to put him in a new burrow. I found a hole 
along the wall of our orchard, put the chuck near it and 
left  him.  I  continued  to  visit  him  with  his  milk.  Each 
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
time (e)he greeted me joyfully, drank greedily, and tried 
 
Begin at the End persistently  to  follow  me  back  into  the  house.  The 
① 
Think with Your Pen parting  came  unexpectedly.  I  went  away  on  a  brief  trip. 
② 
When I came back, I saw no sign of him. In the spring 
Pleasure of Freewriting
③ 
when  I  see  a  large,  handsome  woodchuck  playing  on 
Ideas Too Vague to Be Real
④  the grass, I will hope that it is he.
Make It Clear, Make It Logical
⑤ 
(A)
48. 주어진  글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 가장  적절한 것은?
incapable of drawing attention (B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
①  ①  - - ②  - -
in danger of being empty (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
②  ③  - - ④  - -
against the writer’s will (D) (C) (B)
③  ⑤  - -
beyond the compass of words
④ 
⑤  appreciated only by a privileged few 49. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e)  중 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
[48~50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
50. 주어진 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
(A)
①  운전 중 마멋을 발견하고 차를 세웠다.
On May 29th there was a heavy rain but the sun came 
②  스웨터를 벗어 마멋을 감쌌다.
out the next day. Driving back from the village, I stopped 
③  마멋에게 둥근 출입구가 있는 둥지를 마련해 주었다.
the  car  because  a  small  woodchuck  was  traveling 
along  the  road,  its  belly  almost  flat  to  the  gravel.  I  got  ④  우유와 유아용 시리얼의 혼합물을 만들었다.
out, took off my sweater, threw it over the woodchuck and  ⑤  여행에서 돌아온 직후에 마멋을 다시 볼 수 있었다.
wrapped  him  in  it,  then  put  him  on  the  floor  of  the  car 
while I drove home. I guessed the rain had washed out his 
burrow. If I hadn’t come along (a)he would have eventually  *  확인 사항
died of starvation. Rescuing him, I felt as large as Fate.
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
*woodchuck: 마멋(다람쥣과의 짐승) 하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2021학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
제 3 교시
짝수형
7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 텐트를 반품하려는 이유를 고르시오.
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
① 운반하기 무거워서
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
② 캠핑이 취소되어서
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
③ 크기가 작아서
④ 설치 방법이 어려워서
1. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  ⑤ 더 저렴한 제품을 찾아서
고르시오.
Bradford Museum of Failure
① 운동 방법에 관한 동영상 채널을 홍보하려고 8. 대화를 듣고,  에 관해 언급되지 
② 체육관 보수 공사 일정 변경을 공지하려고 않은  것을 고르시오.
③ 스포츠 중계방송 중단을 예고하려고
① 전시품  ② 설립 목적 ③ 개관 연도
④ 동영상 업로드 방법을 설명하려고
④ 입장료 ⑤ 위치
⑤ 헬스클럽 할인 행사를 안내하려고
National Baking Competition
9. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
않는  것을 고르시오.
① 별 관찰은 아이들이 수학 개념에 친숙해지도록 도와준다.
① 해마다 열리는 행사이다.
② 아이들은 별 관찰을 통해 예술적 영감을 얻는다.
② 올해의 주제는 건강한 디저트이다.
③ 야외 활동이 아이들의 신체 발달에 필수적이다. 20
③ 명이 결선에 진출할 것이다.
④ 아이들은 자연을 경험함으로써 인격적으로 성장한다.
④ 수상자들의 조리법이 잡지에 실릴 것이다.
⑤ 수학 문제 풀이는 아이들의 논리적 사고력을 증진시킨다.
⑤ 웹 사이트에서 생중계될 것이다.
3. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 10. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  여자가 주문할 재사용 빨대 
① 탐험가－환경 운동가 ② 신문 기자－화가 세트를 고르시오.
③ 학생－건축가 ④ 건물 관리인－정원사 Reusable Straw Sets (3 pieces)
⑤ 교사－여행사 직원 Length Carrying 
Set Material Price
 (inches) Case
☓
4. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오. A Bamboo $5.99 7
①
B Glass $6.99 7 ◯
② ☓
C Glass $7.99 8
③
D Silicone $8.99 8 ◯
④
E Stainless Steel $11.99 9 ◯
⑤
11. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
How about going to the cafe over there?
①
I don’t feel like going out today.
②
Why didn’t you wear more comfortable shoes?
③
You must get to the airport quickly.
④
I didn’t know you wanted to go sightseeing.
⑤
5. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
12. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
① 사진 전송하기 ② 그림 그리기 적절한 것을 고르시오.
③ 휴대 전화 찾기 ④ 생물 보고서 제출하기 It’s all right. I’ll bring your car over here.
①
⑤ 야생화 개화 시기 검색하기 Okay. I’ll choose another car instead.
②
I see. Then I’ll park somewhere else.
③
6. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오. Never mind. I’ll pay the parking fee later.
④
$180 $190 $200 $210 $230 No thanks. I don’t want my car to be painted.
① ② ③ ④ ⑤ ⑤
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
짝수형
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점]
Woman: Dear Friends, 
Exactly. I’m glad that you bought the displayed one. Season’s greetings. As some of you already know, we are 
①
Good. Call me when my washing machine is repaired. starting the campus food drive. This is how you participate. 
②
You can bring your items for donation to our booths. Our 
Oh, no. It’s too bad you don’t sell the displayed model.
③ donation booths are located in the lobbies of the campus 
I agree. The displayed one may be the best option for me.
④ libraries. Just drop off the items there during usual library 
Sorry. I don’t think I can wait until tomorrow for this one. hours from December 4 to 23. The donated food should be 
⑤
non-perishable like canned meats and canned fruits. Packaged 
goods such as jam and peanut butter are also good. We will 
distribute the food to our neighbors on Christmas Eve. We 
truly appreciate your help.
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
Many blessings, 
적절한 것을 고르시오. [3점] Joanna at Campus Food Bank 
Man:
Wonderful. It was the best ceremony I’ve ever been to. ① 음식물 낭비의 심각성을 알려 주려고
①
② 도서관 이용 시간 변경을 공지하려고
Definitely. I want to go to congratulate him myself.
②
③ 음식 기부에 참여하는 방법을 안내하려고
Don’t mention it. I just did my duty as a citizen.
③
④ 음식 배달 자원봉사 참여에 감사하려고
Of course. You deserve to receive the award.
④ ⑤ 크리스마스 행사 일정을 문의하려고
Don’t worry. I already found his briefcase.
⑤
‘I’
19. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Once again, I had lost the piano contest to my friend. When 
I  learned  that  Linda  had  won,  I  was  deeply  troubled  and 
Ben Stacy
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이  에게 할 말로 가장 적절한  unhappy. My body was shaking with uneasiness. My heart 
beat quickly and my face became reddish. I had to run out of 
것을 고르시오. [3점]
the concert hall to settle down. Sitting on the stairs alone, I 
Ben:
recalled what my teacher had said. “Life is about winning, not 
Feel free to take the tomatoes from my backyard. necessarily about winning against others but winning at being 
①
Tell me if you need help when planting tomatoes. you. And the way to win is to figure out who you are and do 
②
your best.” He was absolutely right. I had no reason to oppose 
Do you want the ripe tomatoes I picked yesterday?
③
my friend. Instead, I should focus on myself and my own 
Why don’t we grow tomatoes in some other places?
④ improvement. I breathed out slowly. My hands were steady 
⑤ Let me take care of your tomatoes while you’re away. now. At last, my mind was at peace.
upset calm grateful sorrowful
① → ② →
envious doubtful surprised disappointed
③ → ④ →
bored relieved
⑤ →
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? 20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Developing  expertise  carries  costs  of  its  own.  We  can 
color change in nature throughout seasons
①
become experts in some areas, like speaking a language or 
various colors used in traditional English customs
② knowing our favorite foods, simply by living our lives, but in 
differences in color perceptions according to culture
③ many other domains expertise requires considerable training 
why expressions related to colors are common in English and effort. What’s more, expertise is domain specific. The 
④
how color-related English expressions gained their meanings expertise that we work hard to acquire in one domain will 
⑤
carry over only imperfectly to related ones, and not at all to 
unrelated ones. In the end, as much as we may want to become 
experts on everything in our lives, there simply isn’t enough 
time  to  do  so.  Even  in  areas  where  we  could,  it  won’t 
17. 언급된 색깔이 아닌  것은? necessarily  be  worth  the  effort.  It’s  clear  that  we  should 
blue white green concentrate our own expertise on those domains of choice that 
① ② ③
are most common and/or important to our lives, and those we 
red yellow
④ ⑤
actively enjoy learning about and choosing from. 
① 전문성 함양에는 타고난 재능보다 노력과 훈련이 중요하다.
② 자신에게 의미 있는 영역을 정해서 전문성을 키워야 한다.
③ 전문성을 기르기 위해서는 구체적인 계획과 실천이 필수적이다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에  .
④ 전문가는  일의  우선순위를  결정해서  업무를  수행해야  한다
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 전문가가 되기 위해서는 다양한 분야에 관심을 가져야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
짝수형
the role of the ‘lion’s historians’
21. 밑줄 친  가  다음 글에서 의미 23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? [3점]
하는  바로 가장 적절한 것은? Difficulties  arise  when  we  do  not  think  of  people  and 
There is an African proverb that says, ‘Till the lions have  machines as collaborative systems, but assign whatever tasks 
their historians, tales of hunting will always glorify the hunter’.  can be automated to the machines and leave the rest to people. 
The  proverb  is  about  power,  control  and  law  making.  This  ends  up  requiring  people  to  behave  in  machine-like 
Environmental journalists have to play the role of the ‘lion’s  fashion,  in  ways  that  differ  from  human  capabilities.  We 
historians’. They have to put across the point of view of the  expect people to monitor machines, which means keeping alert 
environment to people who make the laws. They have to be the  for long periods, something we are bad at. We require people 
voice of wild India. The present rate of human consumption is  to  do  repeated  operations  with  the  extreme  precision  and 
completely unsustainable. Forest, wetlands, wastelands, coastal  accuracy required by machines, again something we are not 
zones, eco-sensitive zones, they are all seen as disposable for  good  at.  When  we  divide  up  the  machine  and  human 
the accelerating demands of human population. But to ask for  components of a task in this way, we fail to take advantage of 
any change in human behaviour whether it be to cut down on  human strengths and capabilities but instead rely upon areas 
―
consumption, alter lifestyles or decrease population growth where  we  are  genetically,  biologically  unsuited.  Yet,  when 
―
is seen as a violation of human rights. But at some point human  people fail, they are blamed. 
rights become ‘wrongs’. It’s time we changed our thinking so 
difficulties of overcoming human weaknesses to avoid failure
①
that there is no difference between the rights of humans and the 
issues of allocating unfit tasks to humans in automated systems
②
rights of the rest of the environment.
benefits of allowing machines and humans to work together
③
uncovering the history of a species’ biological evolution reasons why humans continue to pursue machine automation
① ④
urging a shift to sustainable human behaviour for nature influences of human actions on a machine’s performance
② ⑤
fighting against widespread violations of human rights
③
rewriting history for more underrepresented people
④
restricting the power of environmental lawmakers
⑤
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
Prior to file-sharing services, music albums landed exclusively  24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
in the hands of music critics before their release. These critics  People  don’t  usually  think  of  touch  as  a  temporal 
would listen to them well before the general public could and  phenomenon, but it is every bit as time-based as it is spatial. 
preview them for the rest of the world in their reviews. Once  You can carry out an experiment to see for yourself. Ask a 
the internet made music easily accessible and allowed even  friend to cup his hand, palm face up, and close his eyes. Place 
advanced releases to spread through online social networks,  a  small  ordinary  object  in  his  palm a  ring,  an  eraser, 
―
availability of new music became democratized, which meant  anything will do and ask him to identify it without moving 
―
critics  no  longer  had  unique  access.  That  is,  critics  and  any part of his hand. He won’t have a clue other than weight 
laypeople alike could obtain new music simultaneously. Social  and maybe overall size. Then tell him to keep his eyes closed 
media services also enabled people to publicize their views on  and move his fingers over the object. He’ll most likely identify 
new songs, list their new favorite bands in their social media  it at once. By allowing the fingers to move, you’ve added time 
bios, and argue over new music endlessly on message boards.  to the sensory perception of touch. There’s a direct analogy 
The result was that critics now could access the opinions of the  between  the  fovea  at  the  center  of  your  retina  and  your 
masses on a particular album  before writing their reviews.  fingertips, both of which have high acuity. Your ability to 
Thus, instead of music reviews guiding popular opinion toward  make complex use of touch, such as buttoning your shirt or 
art (as they did in preinternet times), music reviews began to  unlocking your front door in the dark, depends on continuous 
reflect consciously or subconsciously public opinion.  time-varying patterns of touch sensation.
― ―
*laypeople: 비전문가 *analogy: 유사 **fovea: (망막의)  중심와(窩) ***retina: 망막
Touch and Movement: Two Major Elements of Humanity
① 미디어 환경의 변화로 음악 비평이 대중의 영향을 받게 되었다. ①
The Role of Touch in Forming the Concept of Time
② 인터넷의 발달로 다양한 장르의 음악을 접하는 것이 가능해졌다. ②
Time Does Matter: A Hidden Essence of Touch
③ 비평가의 음악 비평은 자신의 주관적인 경험을 기반으로 한다.  ③
How to Use the Five Senses in a Timely Manner
④ 오늘날 새로운 음악은 대중의 기호를 확인한 후에 공개된다. ④
The Surprising Function of Touch as a Booster of Knowledge
⑤ 온라인 환경의 대두로 음악 비평의 질이 전반적으로 상승하였다. ⑤
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
짝수형
City of Sittka Public Bike Sharing Service
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 
안내문의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
City of Sittka Public Bike Sharing Service
Are you planning to explore the city?
This is the eco-friendly way to do it!
Rent
Register anywhere via our easy app. 
∙
Payment can be made only by credit card.
∙
Fee
Free for the first 30 minutes
∙
One dollar per additional 30 minutes
∙
Use
Choose a bike and scan the QR code on the bike. 
∙
The graph above shows the online shares of retail sales for  Helmets are not provided.
∙
each of six countries in 2012 and in 2019. The online share of  Return
retail sales refers to the percentage of retail sales conducted  Return the bike to the Green Zone shown on the app.
∙
online in a given country. For each country, its online share  Complete the return by pressing the OK button on the bike.
① ∙
of retail sales in 2019 was larger than that in 2012. Among 
②
the six countries, the UK owned the largest online share of retail  ① 신용 카드 결제만 가능하다.
30
sales with 19.7% in 2019. In 2019, the U.S. had the second  ② 처음  분은 무료이다.
③
QR
largest online share of retail sales with 16.5%. In 2012, the  ③ 자전거의    코드를 스캔해서 이용한다.
④
online share of retail sales in the Netherlands was larger than  ④ 헬멧이 제공된다.
OK
that in France, whereas the reverse was true in 2019. In the  ⑤ 자전거의    버튼을 눌러서 반납을 완료한다.
⑤
case of Spain and Italy, the online share of retail sales in each 
country was less than 5.0% both in 2012 and in 2019.
Jason’s Photography Class
28. 에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과 
일치하는 것은?
Frank Hyneman Knight
26. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 
Jason’s Photography Class
않는  것은?
Are you tired of taking pictures with your camera set to 
Frank  Hyneman  Knight  was  one  of  the  most  influential 
“Auto”? Do you want to create more professional-looking 
economists of the twentieth century. After obtaining his Ph.D. 
photos? You won’t want to miss this opportunity.
in 1916 at Cornell University, Knight taught at Cornell, the 
Date: Saturday, December 19
∙
University of Iowa, and the University of Chicago. Knight 
Time: 1:30 p.m. 5:30 p.m.
spent most of his career at the University of Chicago. Some of  ∙ —
Place: Thrombon Building, Room 2 on the first floor
his students at Chicago later received the Nobel Prize. Knight  ∙
Tuition Fee: $50 (snacks provided) 
is known as the author of the book Risk, Uncertainty and Profit,  ∙
a study of the role of the entrepreneur in economic life. He also  ∙Level: Beginner
wrote a brief introduction to economics entitled The Economic  Topics to Be Covered: 
∙󰠂
Organization, which became a classic of microeconomic theory.  󰠂Equipment Selection
Lighting Techniques
But Knight was much more than an economist; he was also a  󰠂
Color Selection
social philosopher. Later in his career, Knight developed his  󰠂
Special Effects
theories of freedom, democracy, and ethics. After retiring in 1952, 
Class size is limited to eight, so don’t delay!
Knight remained active in teaching and writing. ∙
Visit our web site at www.eypcap.com to register.
*entrepreneur: 기업가
20
① 세기의 가장 영향력 있는 경제학자들 중 한 명이었다. ① 오전에 시작된다.
University of Chicago 3
② 경력의 대부분을  에서 보냈다. ② 층에서 진행된다.
③ 그의 학생들 중 몇 명은 나중에 노벨상을 받았다. ③ 중급자 수준이다.
Risk, Uncertainty and Profit
④ 의 저자로 알려져 있다. ④ 다루는 주제 중 하나는 특수 효과이다.
⑤ 은퇴 후에는 가르치는 일은 하지 않고 글 쓰는 일에 전념했다. ⑤ 수강 학생 수에는 제한이 없다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
짝수형
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은? [3점] [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Regulations covering scientific experiments on human subjects  31. In the classic model of the Sumerian economy, the temple 
are strict. Subjects must give their informed, written consent, 
functioned as an administrative authority governing commodity 
and experimenters must submit their proposed experiments to  production,  collection,  and  redistribution.  The  discovery  of 
thorough examination by overseeing bodies. Scientists who  administrative  tablets  from  the  temple  complexes  at  Uruk 
experiment on themselves can, functionally if not legally, avoid  suggests that token use and consequently writing evolved as a 
the restrictions associated with experimenting on other people.  tool of centralized economic governance. Given the lack of 
①
They can also sidestep most of the ethical issues involved:  archaeological evidence from Uruk-period domestic sites, it is 
nobody, presumably, is more aware of an experiment’s potential  not  clear  whether  individuals  also  used  the  system  for 
hazards  than  the  scientist  who  devised it.  Nonetheless,  . For that matter, it is not clear 
②
experimenting on oneself remains deeply problematic. One  how widespread literacy was at its beginnings. The use of 
③
obvious  drawback  is  the  danger  involved;  knowing  that  it  identifiable symbols and pictograms on the early tablets is 
exists does nothing to reduce it. A less obvious drawback is  consistent  with  administrators  needing  a  lexicon  that  was 
④
mutually  intelligible  by  literate  and  nonliterate  parties.  As 
the limited range of data that the experiment can generate. 
cuneiform  script  became  more  abstract,  literacy  must  have 
Human anatomy and physiology vary, in small but significant 
become increasingly important to ensure one understood what 
ways, according to gender, age, lifestyle, and other factors. 
he or she had agreed to.
Experimental results derived from a single subject are, therefore, 
of limited value; there is no way to know ⑤what the subject’s  *archaeological: 고고학적인 **lexicon: 어휘 목록
responses are typical or atypical of the response of humans as a  ***cuneiform script: 쐐기 문자
group.
religious events
①
personal agreements
*consent: 동의 **anatomy: (해부학적)  구조 ②
communal responsibilities
***physiology: 생리적 현상 ③
historical records
④
power shifts
⑤
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
32. Choosing similar friends can have a rationale. Assessing 
않은  것은?
the  survivability  of  an  environment  can  be  risky  (if  an 
How the bandwagon effect occurs is demonstrated by the 
environment turns out to be deadly, for instance, it might be 
history of measurements of the speed of light. Because this 
too late by the time you found out), so humans have evolved 
speed is the basis of the theory of relativity, it’s one of the 
the desire to associate with similar individuals as a way to 
most frequently and carefully measured quantities in science. 
①
perform this function efficiently. This is especially useful to a 
As  far  as  we  know,  the  speed  hasn’t  changed  over  time. 
species that lives in so many different sorts of environments. 
However, from 1870 to 1900, all the experiments found speeds 
However,  the  carrying  capacity  of  a  given  environment 
that were too high. Then, from 1900 to 1950, the opposite 
② . If resources 
happened all the experiments found speeds that were too 
― are very limited, the individuals who live in a particular place 
low! This kind of error, where results are always on one side of 
cannot all do the exact same thing (for example, if there are 
the real value, is called “bias.” It probably happened because 
few trees, people cannot all live in tree houses, or if mangoes 
over time, experimenters subconsciously adjusted their results 
are in short supply, people cannot all live solely on a diet of 
to match what they expected to find. If a result fit what 
③ mangoes). A rational strategy would therefore sometimes be to 
they expected, they kept it. If a result didn’t fit, they threw it out. 
avoid similar members of one’s species.
They weren’t being intentionally dishonest, just influenced 
④ exceeds the expected demands of a community
①
by the conventional wisdom. The pattern only changed when 
is decreased by diverse means of survival
②
someone lacked the courage to report what was actually 
⑤ places a limit on this strategy
③
measured instead of what was expected.
makes the world suitable for individuals
④
*bandwagon effect: 편승 효과 ⑤ prevents social ties to dissimilar members
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
짝수형
33. Thanks to newly developed neuroimaging technology, we  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
now have access to the specific brain changes that occur during 
Workers are united by laughing at shared events, even ones 
learning. Even though all of our brains contain the same basic 
that  may  initially  spark  anger or conflict. Humor reframes 
structures, our neural networks are as unique as our fingerprints. 
potentially divisive events into merely “laughable” ones which 
The latest developmental neuroscience research has shown 
are put in perspective as subservient to unifying values held 
that the brain is much more malleable throughout life than 
by  organization  members.  Repeatedly  recounting  humorous 
previously  assumed;  it  develops  in  response  to  its  own 
incidents reinforces unity based on key organizational values.
processes, to its immediate and distant “environments,” and 
One  team  told  repeated  stories  about  a  dumpster  fire, 
to its past and current situations. The brain seeks to create  ①
something  that  does  not  seem  funny  on  its  face,  but  the 
meaning  through  establishing  or  refining  existing  neural 
reactions  of  workers  motivated  to  preserve  safety  sparked 
networks. When we learn a new fact or skill, our neurons 
laughter as the stories were shared multiple times by multiple 
communicate to form networks of connected information. Using 
parties in the workplace. Shared events that cause laughter 
this knowledge or skill results in structural changes to allow  ②
can indicate a sense of belonging since “you had to be there” 
similar future impulses to travel more quickly and efficiently 
to see the humor in them, and non-members were not and do 
than others. High-activity synaptic connections are stabilized 
not. Since  humor  can  easily  capture  people’s  attention, 
and strengthened, while connections with relatively low use are  ③
commercials tend to contain humorous elements, such as funny 
weakened and eventually pruned. In this way, our brains are 
. [3점] faces and gestures. ④Instances of humor serve to enact bonds 
among organization members. Understanding the humor may 
*malleable: 순응성이 있는 **prune: 잘라 내다 ⑤
even be required as an informal badge of membership in the 
designed to maintain their initial structures
① organization.
sculpted by our own history of experiences
② *subservient: 도움이 되는
geared toward strengthening recent memories
③
twinned with the development of other organs
④
portrayed as the seat of logical and creative thinking
⑤
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
34. Successful  integration  of  an  educational  technology  is  The objective of battle, to “throw” the enemy and to 
marked  by  that  technology  being  regarded  by  users  as  an  make him defenseless, may temporarily blind commanders 
unobtrusive facilitator of learning, instruction, or performance.  and even strategists to the larger purpose of war. War is 
When the focus shifts from the technology being used to the  never an isolated act, nor is it ever only one decision.
educational  purpose  that  technology  serves,  then  that 
(A) To be political, a political entity or a representative of a 
technology is becoming a comfortable and trusted element, 
political entity, whatever its constitutional form, has to 
and  can  be  regarded  as  being successfully  integrated.  Few 
people give a second thought to the use of a ball-point pen  have an intention, a will. That intention has to be clearly 
although the mechanisms involved vary some use a twist  expressed.
―
mechanism and some use a push button on top, and there are 
(B) In the real world, war’s larger purpose is always a political 
other variations as well. Personal computers have reached a 
purpose. It transcends the use of force. This insight was 
similar level of familiarity for a great many users, but certainly 
famously captured by Clausewitz’s most famous phrase, 
not for all. New and emerging technologies often introduce 
“War is a mere continuation of politics by other means.”
both  fascination  and  frustration  with  users.  As  long  as 
(C) And one side’s will has to be transmitted to the enemy at 
  in 
some point during the confrontation (it does not have to be 
promoting  learning,  instruction,  or  performance,  then  one 
ought not to conclude that the technology has been successfully  publicly communicated). A violent act and its larger political 
integrated at least for that user. intention must also be attributed to one side at some point 
― [3점]
during the confrontation. History does not know of acts of 
*unobtrusive: 눈에 띄지 않는
war without eventual attribution.
the user successfully achieves familiarity with the technology
①
the user’s preference for interaction with other users persists *entity: 실체 **transcend: 초월하다
②
the user continues to employ outdated educational techniques (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ ① － － ② － －
the user involuntarily gets used to the misuse of the technology (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ ③ － － ④ － －
the user’s focus is on the technology itself rather than its use (C) (B) (A)
⑤ ⑤ － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
짝수형
37. 39.
Experts have identified a large number of measures that  Note that copyright covers the expression of an idea and 
promote energy efficiency. Unfortunately many of them are  not the idea itself. 
not cost effective. This is a fundamental requirement for 
Designers draw on their experience of design when approaching 
energy efficiency investment from an economic perspective. 
a new project. This includes the use of previous designs that they 
know work both designs that they have created themselves and 
(A) And this has direct repercussions at the individual level:  ―
those that others have created. ( ) Others’ creations often spark 
households can reduce the cost of electricity and gas bills,  ①
inspiration that also leads to new ideas and innovation. ( ) This 
and improve their health and comfort, while companies  ②
is well known and understood. ( ) However, the expression 
can increase their competitiveness and their productivity.  ③
of an idea is protected by copyright, and people who infringe on 
Finally, the market for energy efficiency could contribute 
that copyright can be taken to court and prosecuted. ( ) This 
to the economy through job and firms creation.  ④
means, for example, that while there are numerous smartphones 
(B) There are significant externalities to take into account and 
all  with  similar  functionality,  this  does  not  represent  an 
there are also macroeconomic effects. For instance, at the 
infringement of copyright as the idea has been expressed in 
aggregate level, improving the level of national energy 
different  ways  and  it  is  the  expression  that  has  been 
efficiency has positive effects on macroeconomic issues 
copyrighted. ( ) Copyright  is  free  and  is  automatically 
⑤
such as energy dependence, climate change, health, national 
invested in the author, for instance, the writer of a book or a 
competitiveness and reducing fuel poverty. programmer who develops a program, unless they sign the 
(C) However, the calculation of such cost effectiveness is not  copyright over to someone else.
[3점]
easy: it is not simply a case of looking at private costs and 
*infringe: 침해하다 **prosecute: 기소하다
comparing them to the reductions achieved.
[3점]
*repercussion: 반향,  영향 **aggregate: 집합의 40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸 (A), 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) (B)
① － － ② － － 에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③ － － ④ － －
From a cross-cultural perspective the equation between 
(C) (B) (A)
⑤ － －
public leadership and dominance is questionable. What does 
one mean by ‘dominance’? Does it indicate coercion? Or 
control over ‘the most valued’? ‘Political’ systems may be 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 
about  both,  either,  or  conceivably  neither.  The  idea  of 
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
‘control’ would be a bothersome one for many peoples, as 
38. for instance among many native peoples of Amazonia where 
all members of a community are fond of their personal 
I have still not exactly pinpointed Maddy’s character since 
autonomy and notably allergic to any obvious expression of 
wickedness takes many forms.   
control or coercion. The conception of political power as a 
coercive force, while it may be a Western fixation, is not a 
Imagine I tell you that Maddy is bad. Perhaps you infer from 
universal. It is very unusual for an Amazonian leader to give 
my intonation, or the context in which we are talking, that I 
an order. If many peoples do not view political power as a 
mean morally bad. Additionally, you will probably infer that I 
coercive force, nor as the most valued domain, then the leap 
am disapproving of Maddy, or saying that I think you should 
from ‘the political’ to ‘domination’ (as coercion), and from 
disapprove of her, or similar, given typical linguistic conventions 
there to ‘domination of women’, is a shaky one. As Marilyn 
and assuming I am sincere. ( ) However, you might not 
① Strathern has remarked, the notions of ‘the political’ and 
get a more detailed sense of the particular sorts of way in 
‘political personhood’ are cultural obsessions of our own, a 
which Maddy is bad, her typical character traits, and the like, 
bias long reflected in anthropological constructs.
since people can be bad in many ways. ( ) In contrast, if I 
② *coercion: 강제 **autonomy: 자율
say that Maddy is wicked, then you get more of a sense of her 
***anthropological: 인류학의
󰀻
typical actions and attitudes to others. ( ) The word ‘wicked’ 
③
is more specific than ‘bad’. ( ) But there is more detail 
④
It is  (A)  to understand political power in other 
nevertheless,  perhaps  a  stronger  connotation  of  the  sort  of 
cultures  through our  own  notion  of  it because ideas  of 
person  Maddy  is. ( ) In  addition,  and  again  assuming 
⑤ political power are not  (B)  across cultures.
typical linguistic conventions, you should also get a sense that 
I  am  disapproving  of  Maddy,  or  saying  that  you  should  (A) (B) (A) (B)
disapprove  of  her,  or  similar,  assuming  that  we  are  still  rational flexible appropriate commonplace
① … ② …
discussing her moral character. misguided uniform unreasonable varied
③ … ④ …
*connotation: 함축  ⑤ effective …objective
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
짝수형
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
“All right. I’m sure you’re doing your work.” Mom replied, 
Our irresistible tendency to see things in human terms
― and  then  sharply  added  a  question.  “Sean,  what  are  you 
that  we  are  often  mistaken  in  attributing  complex  human 
doing?” Sean’s face immediately became blank, and he said, 
motives and processing abilities to other species―does not  “Nothing.” “Come here, Honey, and you can help me.” Sean 
mean  that  an  animal’s  behavior  is  not,  in  fact,  complex.  ran to the kitchen right away. “What can I do for you, Mom?” 
Rather, it means that the complexity of the animal’s behavior  His voice was high, and Felix could sense that his brother was 
is not purely a (a)product of its internal complexity. Herbert  excited. Felix was pleased to get rid of (b)the policeman, and 
now he could concentrate on the lesson, at least till Sean came 
Simon’s “parable of the ant” makes this point very clearly. 
back. 
Imagine  an  ant  walking  along  a  beach,  and (b)visualize 
tracking the trajectory of the ant as it moves. The trajectory  (C)
would show a lot of twists and turns, and would be very 
While  checking  on  his  family,  Sean  interfered  in  their 
irregular and complicated. One could then suppose that the ant  business as if it was his own. This time, (c)the playful and 
had  equally  complicated (c)internal  navigational  abilities,  curious  boy  was  interested  in  his  brother  Felix,  who 
and work out what these were likely to be by analyzing the  committed himself to studying no matter where he was. Sean 
secretly looked inside his brother’s room from the door, and 
trajectory to infer the rules and mechanisms that could produce 
shouted toward the kitchen where Mom was working, “Mom, 
such  a  complex  navigational path.  The  complexity  of  the 
Felix isn’t studying. He’s just watching a funny video.” Sean 
trajectory, however, “is really a complexity in the surface of 
was naughtily smiling at his brother. 
the beach, not a complexity in the ant.” In reality, the ant may 
be using a set of very (d)complex rules: it is the interaction  *naughtily: 짓궂게
of these rules with the environment that actually produces the  (D)
complex trajectory, not the ant alone. Put more generally, the  Felix was mad because (d)his little brother was bothering 
parable  of  the  ant  illustrates  that  there  is  no  necessary  him. Felix was studying science using a video posted on the 
correlation between the complexity of an (e)observed behavior  school web site. He made an angry face at the naughty boy. 
Right then, Mom asked loudly from the kitchen, “What are 
and the complexity of the mechanism that produces it.
you  doing,  Felix?”  Felix’s  room  was  located  next  to  the 
*parable: 우화 **trajectory: 이동 경로 kitchen, and he could hear Mom clearly. “I’m watching a 
lecture  video  for  my  science  class.”  Felix  argued  against 
Sean’s accusation and mischievously stuck (e)his tongue out 
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
at his little brother.
Open the Mysterious Door to Environmental Complexity!
① *mischievously: 장난기 있게
Peaceful Coexistence of Human Beings and Animals
②
What Makes the Complexity of Animal Behavior? (A)
③ 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Animals’ Dilemma: Finding Their Way in a Human World
④ 가장 적절한 것은?
Environmental Influences on Human Behavior Complexity
⑤ (B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
① － － ② － －
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③ － － ④ － －
(a) (e)
42. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은  (D) (C) (B)
⑤ － －
것은? [3점]
①  (a) ②  (b) ③  (c) ④  (d) ⑤  (e)  44. 밑줄 친 (a)～(e)  중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
(A) 45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
In this area, heavy snow in winter was not uncommon. 
① 엄마는 폭설로 인해 집에서 업무를 보고 있었다.
Sometimes it poured down for hours and hours and piled up  Sean
② 은 엄마가 불러서 주방으로 달려갔다.
very high. Then, no one could go out. Today too, because of 
Sean
③ 은 몰래 형의 방을 들여다보았다.
the  heavy  snow,  Mom  was  doing  her  office  work  at  the 
Felix
④ 는 자신의 방에서 게임을 하고 있었다.
kitchen table. Felix, the high schooler, had to take online 
Felix .
⑤ 의 방은 주방  옆에  있었다
classes in his room. Five-year-old Sean, who normally went 
to kindergarten, was sneaking around in the house playing 
home  policeman. (a)The  kindergartener  wanted  to  know 
what his family members were up to, and was checking up on  *  확인 사항
everyone.
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
*sneak: 몰래 움직이다 하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
제 3 교시
홀수형
5. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터  22번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 
①  주차 관리 요원을 모집하려고
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
②  요가 센터 개장을 홍보하려고
③  주차장 확장 공사를 안내하려고
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ④  체육 시설 안전 점검을 촉구하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오. ⑤  새로운 요가 프로그램을 소개하려고
It’s time to go to bed.
① 
Let’s not buy this apartment.
② 
6. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
Sleep is better than medicine.
③ 
고르시오.
The neighbors are really noisy.
④ 
This new house has enough rooms. ①  배낚시 전 확인해야 할 안전 장비
⑤ 
②  배낚시를 즐기는 다양한 방법
③  선상 화재의 주된 원인
④  연령에 따른 구명조끼의 종류
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  ⑤  배낚시 도구의 효과적인 관리 요령
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Right. We need to get a new fridge.
①  7. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
Oh! Then I’ll go buy some right now.
② 
고르시오.
Sure. Let me show you how to cook them.
③ 
①  컴퓨터 구매 시 고려 사항
Wow! This sandwich tastes really good.
④ 
②  컴퓨터 보안 프로그램의 필요성
Yeah. This is a good place for a picnic.
⑤ 
③  컴퓨터 내부 먼지 제거의 중요성
④  컴퓨터 전용 청소 도구의 사용법
⑤  컴퓨터 사용 시간과 건강 간의 관계
3. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
8. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
No. You don’t have to pay the late fee.
①
①  장난감의 과도한 사용은 학습을 방해한다.
Right. I’ll pay now and get the book later.
②
②  장난감의 위생 상태를 확인할 필요가 있다.
It’s my turn. So you have to wait until I’m done.
③
③  장난감 총 사용 시 안전사고에 유의해야 한다.
Okay. I’ll put your name on it, so you’ll be the next.
④ ④  장난감 종류에 따라 연령 제한을 두어야 한다.
Why not? Wait here and I’ll go find the book for you.
⑤ ⑤  장난감 총은 아이들에게 부정적인 영향을 미친다.
9. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
Eva’s Bakery
4. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서  의 위치를 고르시오. 고르시오.
① ②
③ ④ ⑤
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
홀수형
10. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.  18. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  서점 직원－고객 ②  연극 연출가－배우
Woman:
③  동화 작가－독자 ④  도서관 사서－학생
⑤  출판사 편집장－삽화가
Great! I’m sure I can find some books there.
①
Oh, good! You can help me find the library.
②
11. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
Sure. I finished writing my biology paper.
③
고르시오.
I know. That’s why I like going to the zoo.
④
①  수업 참관하기 ②  만화 그려 주기 That’s okay. I already know how to get there.
⑤
③  팸플릿 복사하기 ④  읽기 자료 찾아 주기
⑤  현장 학습 일정표 만들기
19. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
12. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
고르시오.
Man:
①  점심 사 오기 ②  사진 가져오기
You have to renew your driver’s license.
① 
③  기사 작성하기 ④  카메라 빌려 주기
I’ll let you take the midterm a second time.
⑤  전시회 준비하기 ② 
Then you should easily pass the test this time.
③ 
I don’t think memorizing is the best way to study.
13. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 언급한 계약서상의 오류를 고르시오. ④ 
No wonder you’re curious about your test results.
⑤ 
①  배송지 ②  제품명 ③  제품 수량
④  보증 기간 ⑤  배송 날짜
Paul Jennifer
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이  에게 할 말로 가장 
head chef
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자가  에 지원하지 못하는  이유를 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
고르시오.
Paul:
①  다음 주에 근무를 시작해야 해서
Would you fax me the document right away?
②  기숙사 생활을 해야 해서 ① 
Will you copy the document for the meeting?
③  호텔에서의 요리사 경력이 부족해서 ② 
④  요리 대회 수상 실적이 없어서 If you don’t hurry, you’ll miss your flight.
③ 
⑤  프랑스어를 못해서 I have no choice but to visit your office.
④ 
Please check whether you got my fax.
⑤ 
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$30 $36 $40 $50 $54
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
16. Amazing Art Lovers에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지  [21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
않는  것을 고르시오. 21. 여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
43
①  년의 역사를 가진 동아리이다.
①  졸업식 행사 참석을 권유하려고
10
②  지난  년 동안 지역 사회에서 자원 봉사를 해 왔다.
②  학교 축제 프로그램을 안내하려고
③  일주일 전에,  공장 벽에 그림을 그려 달라고 요청받았다.
③  학생 송별회 준비 사항을 점검하려고
④  전공에 관계없이 신입 회원을 찾고 있다.
④  생일 파티 전문 업체를 홍보하려고
⑤  전화번호가 웹사이트에 게시되어 있다.
⑤  국제 영화제 개막식에 초청하려고
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택한 제품을 
고르시오. 22. 언급된 물건이 아닌  것은?
①  리본 ②  카드 ③  풍선
④  케이크 ⑤  카메라
①
②
③
④   이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의 
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
홀수형
23. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Some people punish themselves when they are under time 
Good news for pet shop owners!
pressure. They delete all the games on their PC, they stop 
going for walks, and they don’t spend time with their friends. 
We,  ABLE  Shipping,  have  developed  the  perfect 
They then have less pleasure in life and less balance and 
system for shipping fish to your customers. We can  ―
their work performance actually declines. Break out of this 
ship live fish across the nation, and the fish will do 
pattern  by  paying  more  attention  to  relaxation  and  getting 
just fine. Are you wondering how we ensure each fish 
has a safe journey? Here’s the secret. We pack each  more involved in living when you are under pressure. Define 
one  in  an  oxygen-inflated  plastic  bag  with  enough  clear  time  periods  for  this:  half  an  hour  for  a  walk,  ten 
water  to  keep  the  fish  relaxed  and  comfortable.  minutes to play a game on your PC, and so on. Your mind will 
Furthermore, each bag is wrapped in a cushion and  become more creative during the break, and you will become 
then  placed  inside  a  shipping  box.  Your  fish  will  mentally fitter. Free time without feelings of guilt will give 
enjoy the journey all the way to your customers’ front  you the strength to do high-quality work in the remaining 
doors.  Call  us  at  1-800-456-4959  or  e-mail  us  at  time. Furthermore, a certain amount of recreation reduces the 
fishlove@ableshipping.com,  and  you’ll  see  how  it  chances of developing stress-related disorders.
works.
①  컴퓨터 게임 중독의 심각성
②  직장 내 대인 관계의 중요성
①  가맹점 운영의 장점을 홍보하려고
③  집중력과 학습 능력 간의 관계
②  물고기 질병 예방법을 공지하려고
④  죄책감이 정신 건강에 미치는 영향
③  애완동물용 먹이 종류를 소개하려고
⑤  시간적 압박하에서의 휴식의 필요성
④  애완동물 동반 여행 수칙을 안내하려고
⑤  물고기 안전 배송 서비스를 광고하려고
26. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
24. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? Large animals are actually less dangerous to hikers than 
smaller ones. Common sense tells us that we should avoid 
In  our  efforts  to  be  the  good  child,  the  uncomplaining 
tigers, bears, and other large threatening animals. But smaller 
employee, or the cooperative patient, many of us fall into the 
animals are actually more threatening than bigger animals. To 
trap of trying to please people by going along with whatever 
overcome  disadvantages  of  their  size,  small  animals  have 
they  want  us  to  do.  At  times,  we  lose  track  of  our  own 
developed  useful  weapons  such  as  poison  to  protect 
boundaries and needs, and the cost of this could be our life, 
themselves  in  the  wild.  Each  year,  only  a  few  people  are 
both symbolically and literally. When we are unable to set 
attacked by tigers or bears, and most of these incidents are 
healthy limits, it causes distress in our relationships. But when 
caused by the people themselves. However, more people are 
we learn to say no to what we don’t feel like doing in order to 
killed by bites from small poisonous snakes than by these 
say  yes  to  our  true  self,  we  feel  empowered,  and  our 
large animals. Even more people lose their lives from allergic 
relationships with others improve. So don’t be afraid to say 
reactions  to  common  bee  stings.  For  these  reasons,  hikers 
no. Try to catch yourself in the moment and use your true 
should be careful about small dangerous creatures.
voice to say what you really want to say.
How to Deal with Allergies
① 
①  난관을 극복할 때 성취감이 생긴다.
Watch Out for Small Animals!
② 
②  항상 타인의 입장을 먼저 고려해야 한다.
Animals: Human’s True Friends
③  자신이 원하지 않는 일은 거절할 필요가 있다. ③ 
Animals Attack Human Villages!
④  자신의 의견을 고집하면 대인 관계가 악화된다. ④ 
Why Are Wild Animals Endangered?
⑤  제안을 승낙하기 전에는 그 의도를 파악해야 한다. ⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
홀수형
Modern Pottery Museum
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점] 29. 에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과 
I hope you remember our discussion last Monday about the  일치하는 것은?
servicing  of  the  washing  machine  supplied  to  us  three 
①
months ago. I regret to say the machine is no longer working. As 
Modern Pottery Museum
we agreed during the meeting, please send a service engineer as 
soon as possible to repair it. The product warranty says  that 
②
you provide spare parts and materials for free, but charge for the 
engineer’s labor. This sounds  unfair. I believe the machine’s 
③
failure is caused by a manufacturing defect. Initially, it made a 
lot of noise, and later, it stopped  to operate entirely. As it is 
④
wholly the company’s responsibility to correct the defect, I  The  Modern  Pottery  Museum  exhibits  collections  of 
hope you will not make us  pay for the labor component of its  artistic ceramic works. It also offers information about 
⑤
repair. the history and development of modern pottery. Visitors 
can make their own plates or cups for an additional fee. 
Hours*
Weekdays: 9:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m.
－
Weekends: 9:00 a.m. 5:00 p.m.
－
*The museum is closed on the first Monday of every 
month.
Fees
General Admission: $5
Children under 12: Free
Pottery Experience: $10
Parking
(A) (B) (C) A parking discount is available to museum visitors. To 
28. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
receive the discount, visitors must have their parking 
적절한 것은?  [3점]
tickets stamped at the visitor information desk.
As we all know, it is not always easy to get work done at the 
office.  There  is  (A) frequently/rarely quiet  time  during 
regular business hours to sit and concentrate. Office workers 
①  방문객은 추가 비용 없이 접시나 컵을 만들 수 있다.
are  regularly  interrupted  by  ringing  phones,  impromptu 
1
②  주말은 평일보다 관람 시간이  시간 더 길다.
meetings, and chattering coworkers. This can be as frustrating 
③  매주 월요일에 휴관한다.
for an employee as it is for the employer who is paying for this 
12 $5
④  세 미만의 어린이는 입장료가  이다.
nonproductive work time. Working at home can free you from 
⑤  방문객은 주차 요금을 할인받을 수 있다.
these (B) attractions/distractions, giving you long blocks of 
time to focus on your work. Although your home may present 
its own problems, too, there are ways to deal with them. Your 
productivity will certainly (C) decrease/increase, as will the 
quality of your work product. At the same time, you will get to 
enjoy the personal satisfaction of focusing on your work and 
getting it done.
*impromptu: 즉석의
(A) (B) (C)
frequently distractions increase
① …… ……
frequently attractions decrease
② …… ……
rarely distractions increase
③ …… ……
rarely attractions decrease
④ …… ……
rarely distractions decrease
⑤ …… ……
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
홀수형
Nature Foundation Harmony Youth Orchestra Auditions
30.   회원의  혜택에  관한  다음  안내문의  31. 에 관한 다음  안내문의 
내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
BECOME A MEMBER OF
Harmony Youth Orchestra Auditions
THE NATURE FOUNDATION
For the 2014 Season
The Nature Foundation is a world-wide organization 
Audition Dates: December 16th-20th, 2013
dedicated to the preservation of our natural environment. 
Help us by joining today, and enjoy all the benefits of 
The Harmony Youth Orchestra is for you if you wish to 
membership for only $50 per year.
participate  in  great  musical  performances  under 
Harmony’s conductor.
Members receive:
Our monthly magazine, Nature World, for one year.
∙
You must...
A weekly newsletter about upcoming events held by 
∙
currently be a middle or high school student.
the Foundation. ∙
send in a completed audition application form and a 
Invitations to special lectures on natural history and  ∙
∙
recommendation  from  your  music  teacher  by 
environmental science.
November 30th.
Members also get: prepare  to  play  a  piece  of  your  choice  for  the 
∙
A  10%  discount  on  books  published  by  the  audition.
∙
Foundation.
A  20%  discount  on  our  other  magazines  like  You will...
∙
Nature Kids. receive an e-mail with your audition time and place 
∙
Discounted admission to national parks. about 10 days before your audition day. 
∙
be notified of the final results by e-mail about a week 
∙
If  you  have  further  questions  about  membership 
after the audition.
benefits, please call us at 987-555-4567 or visit our 
website at www.naturefoundation.org.
Application  forms  can  be  downloaded  from  the 
Harmony Youth Orchestra website (www.hyo.org).
$50 2013 12 16 20
① 일 년에  를 내면 모든 혜택을 누린다. ① 오디션 기간은  년  월  일부터  일까지이다.
Nature World
② 일 년 동안 월간 잡지  를 받는다. ② 중․고등학생들이 지원할 수 있다.
11 30
③ 재단 주최 행사에 관한 월간 뉴스레터를 받는다. ③ 월  일까지 지원서와 추천서를 제출해야 한다.
10%
④ 재단 발행 도서 구입 시  를 할인받는다. ④ 오디션 시간과 장소를 이메일로 받는다.
⑤ 국립공원 입장료를 할인받는다. ⑤ 오디션의 최종 결과를 전화로 통지받는다.
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
홀수형
32. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 34. The  importance  of  science  has  led  people  to  think  that 
‘objectivity’ is the best way to see the world to see the facts 
―
without any feelings. However, from a human point of view, 
objectivity is just another attitude. It is an interpretation that 
deliberately ignores our feelings. It is very useful to ensure that 
scientific measurements are taken accurately and so on, but as 
far as life is concerned, it is a bit like turning the color off on 
your TV so that you see everything in black and white and then 
saying that is more truthful. It is not more truthful; it is just a 
filter  that  reduces  the  .  When 
you turn down the feelings, you also turn down the possibility 
of enjoyment.
  [3점]
richness of life
① 
brutality of humans
② 
size of the TV screen
③ 
incorrectness of a theory
The graph above shows the Canadian volunteer rates and  ④ 
criticism of scientific findings
average annual hours of seven age groups in 2007.  In these  ⑤ 
①
groups, the volunteer rates ranged from 29% to 58%, and the 
Canadian average rate was 46%.  The average annual hours 
②
increased with age except for the group aged between 25 and 
34, which volunteered an average of 133 hours.  The 15-24 
③
age group showed the highest volunteer rate but the second 
fewest  average  annual  hours.  The  35-44  age  group  had 
④
fewer average annual hours than the 45-54 age group, while 
the 55-64 and 65-74 age groups showed the same average 
annual  hours.  Despite  their  lowest  rate  of  volunteering, 
⑤
seniors aged 75 and older gave more hours on average than 
any other age group.
35. Sometimes all the outcomes customers are trying to achieve 
in one area have a negative effect on other outcomes. This is 
very common when companies are busy listening to the ‘voice 
of the customer.’ Traveling salespeople, for example, may say 
they want a smaller cell phone, but they may not have thought 
[33～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. about how hard that tiny phone will be to use. Carpenters may 
33. In all cultures in which eye-gaze behavior has been studied,  request a lightweight circular saw without thinking about the 
fact that it will no longer have the power to get through some of 
science  confirms  that  those  who  are  dominant  have  more 
the more difficult jobs. When customers make requests for new 
  in  using  it.  In  essence,  these  individuals  are 
product features, they are usually focused on solving just one 
entitled to look wherever they want. However, subordinates 
problem and are not thinking of how their requested solution 
are more restricted in where they can look and when. Humility 
dictates that in the presence of royalty, as in church, heads are  will  . 
In this situation, customers request new features but reject the 
bowed.  As  a  general  rule,  dominants  tend  to  ignore 
resulting product when they realize the ramifications of their 
subordinates  visually  while  subordinates  tend  to  gaze  at 
dominant  individuals  at  a  distance.  In  other  words,  suggestions―the  added  feature  turns  out  to  be  worthless 
because of the problems it causes.
higher-status individuals can be indifferent while lower-status    [3점]
persons are required to be attentive with their gaze. The king  *ramification: 파생된 문제
is free to look at anyone he wants, but all subjects face the 
impact other product or service functions
① 
king, even as they back out of a room.
  [3점]
delay the introduction of innovative products
② 
*be entitled to: (～할) 권한이 있다 induce other customers to make additional requests
③ 
anxiety conflict freedom bring about excessive competition among companies
①  ②  ③  ④ 
reluctance responsibility discourage companies from listening to customers’ voices
④  ⑤  ⑤ 
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
홀수형
(A) (B)
36. 다음 글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 38. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
Self-monitoring refers to how much people try to control  Life can be like riding a roller coaster. There are ups and 
the way they present themselves to others. Those who have  downs, fast and slow parts, bumps and shaky parts, and even 
high  self-monitoring  want  their  behavior  to  be  socially  times when you’re upside down.  You can’t control which 
①
acceptable. They adjust themselves to any social signal that  way the track (or in this case, life events) will take you. 
indicates appropriate or inappropriate behavior.  (A) ,  When you’re at the bottom, you can see only what’s right 
②
if they are in a meeting and see others making suggestions,  in front of you, but when you get to the top, you can see the 
they will try to make suggestions as well. They are also good  whole picture a lot better.  When you’re starting out, accept 
③
at managing what others think about them.  (B) , those  how you feel and try to enjoy the ride.  When you design an 
④
who have low self-monitoring are not very sensitive to signals  amusement park for children, you should carefully consider 
indicating  socially  acceptable  behavior.  They  are  not  too  the location of the roller coaster.  When it’s over, you’ll see 
⑤
concerned about behaving the right way in a specific context.  that it was really cool even if you couldn’t see that when 
―
For example, if they are in a meeting with the president of an  you first started.
organization,  they  may  act  bored.  They  are  not  deeply 
concerned about how others see them.
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 
곳은?  [3점]
(A) (B)
① For example …… As a result When Tom had helped the blind man to cross the street, he 
② For example …… In contrast realized he had left his book bag on the bus stop bench.
Otherwise As a result
③ ……
Meanwhile In contrast As Tom was waiting for a bus, he noticed a blind man 
④ ……
⑤ Meanwhile …… Nevertheless trying to cross the street. ( ① ) The traffic was heavy, and it 
was likely the blind man would get hit, as he was not crossing 
at a crosswalk. ( ) Tom looked around and saw there was 
②
no one else to help, so he asked the blind man if he would like 
help crossing the street. ( ) The blind man readily said 
③
yes, then latched onto Tom’s arm, and they began their walk 
across the street avoiding speeding cars. ( ) When Tom 
④
looked back at the bus stop bench, he saw another man sitting 
next to his book bag. ( ) And when Tom got to the bus 
⑤
37. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? stop bench, the man said, “I saw what you were doing, so I 
decided to sit here and watch your book bag.”
You have probably heard about sending messages across 
the sea in bottles. The problem is, it is impossible to tell  *latch onto: ～에 달라붙다
how long it will take the sea to deliver its bottled messages 
or where it will wash them up.
40. 다음 글에 드러난 필자의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A) Columbus  was  still  more  than  a  thousand  miles  from  I had volunteered for the charity picnic, and I needed to be 
Europe, and he feared he would never live to tell the king  there on time. Ms. Green, the charity president, was preparing 
and queen of his discovery. So he wrote the news on a  this monthly event by herself. Lily complained, “Mom, I don’t 
piece of paper. feel like going today. We’ve volunteered more than five times 
this year.” She was eating slower than usual. I urged her, 
(B) In 1493, Christopher Columbus sent one of the earliest 
“Lily, don’t you remember we promised to help Ms. Green 
and most famous bottled messages. He was returning to 
last month? Go and get dressed.” I stood by the door and 
Spain  to  tell  the  king  and  queen  about  what  he  had 
pointed at my watch. She slowly pulled on her sweater and 
discovered, when his ship got caught in a bad storm.
said,  “I  still  don’t  feel  like  going.”  I  started  losing  my 
(C) He put it in a wooden bottle and tossed it overboard.  patience. I responded, “Don’t you know Ms. Green has a lot 
More than 300 years later, it was found by the captain of  of  work  to  do  for  the  picnic  today?  It’s  time  you  started 
an American ship off the coast of Africa, near Morocco. thinking about other people.” My voice was growing louder 
with each sentence.
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B) bored irritated envious
③  － － ④  － － ①  ②  ③ 
(C) (B) (A) indifferent delighted
⑤  － － ④  ⑤ 
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
홀수형
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
One day, when I saw my grandmother on the street by 
It is well known that some baseball parks are better for 
chance, I noticed that (b)she had difficulty in reading an 
hitting home runs than others. It is not just the size of the 
English sign. Right at that moment, it hit upon me to teach 
park that matters. Other park conditions such as wind and 
her to read English in return for all she had taught me. I 
humidity also affect whether a ball sails over the fences, and 
talked to my mom about it, and (c)she was delighted with 
players know this. So what happens when a player is moved 
my plan. So my grandmother and I worked hard together 
to a team whose baseball park has better conditions for home 
using books for beginners.
runs  than  his  current  one say,  28  percent  better?  One 
―
analysis found that the player hit 60 percent more home runs. 
(C)
Why? The answer lies in how achievable you think the goal 
My  efforts  were  rewarded  only  a  month  later  on  the 
is. If you think you are likely to hit more home runs, you are 
morning  of  my  eighteenth  birthday.  My  grandmother 
more likely to swing for the fences. But if you think your 
decorated a cake with “HAPPY BIRTHDAY BETTY.” I had 
chance of hitting a home run is smaller, your brain will send 
only taught her the basics of reading, but (d)she had written 
you signals to just try for a single to get on base.
these words all by herself. Touched by this simple message, I 
In business and life, just as in baseball, our   
said, “It’s not just my birthday, Grandma. You stepped into 
can  affect  whether  we  swing  for  the  fences  or  not.  The 
this country at eighteen. Now, you are stepping into another 
baseball research shows us that what matters is not the actual 
new world. So it’s your birthday, too.”
distance  to  the  fence  but  what  our  brains  recognize  that 
distance to be. Consider your work and your current life. Do 
(D)
the fences seem too far away to hit a home run? Simply 
adjust the fences so that it seems easier. My grandmother liked to tell me these interesting stories at 
*single: 1루타, 단타 night. I still remember a few stories in which the gods made 
promises with each other like humans. Those who broke their 
promises  were  punished.  While  listening  to  the  stories,  I 
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
decided that I would not break any promises. The morals of 
Move Your Fences Closer
① (e)her stories taught me how I should live my life.
Why Does Teamwork Matter?
②
Is Statistics Necessary in Sports?
③
(A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Change Your Team for More Benefits
④
가장 적절한 것은?
Better Park Conditions: Size vs. Wind
⑤
(B) (C) (D) (B) (D) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
(C) (B) (D) (D) (B) (C)
③  － － ④  － －
(D) (C) (B)
⑤  － －
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
(a) (e)
strengths perceptions incomes 44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
①  ②  ③ 
sacrifices appearances 것은?
④  ⑤ 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
grandmother
45. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
18
① 세에 그리스에서 미국으로 이민을 왔다.
② 학교에서 읽기를 배운 적이 없다.
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
③ 필자와 초보자용 책으로 공부하였다.
(A)
④ 필자의 생일 케이크에 축하 문구로 장식을 하였다.
Mom once said that my grandmother came to America as a  ⑤ 필자에게 밤에 재미있는 이야기를 듣는 것을 좋아했다.
poor  uneducated  Greek  immigrant  at  eighteen.  My 
grandmother wanted to go to school, but the harsh immigrant 
life pushed (a)her to support her family. Though she never 
*  확인 사항
learned to read in school, she knew many traditional stories 
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
from her home country. 
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2014학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
제 3 교시
홀수형
6. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터  22번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
20번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 21번부터 22번까지는 두 번 
①  컴퓨터 구매 시 고려 사항
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
②  컴퓨터 보안 프로그램의 필요성
③  컴퓨터 내부 먼지 제거의 중요성
1. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  ④  컴퓨터 전용 청소 도구의 사용법
적절한 것을 고르시오. ⑤  컴퓨터 사용 시간과 건강 간의 관계
Right. We need to get a new fridge.
① 
Oh! Then I’ll go buy some right now.
② 
Sure. Let me show you how to cook them.
③  7. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Wow! This sandwich tastes really good.
④ 
①  장난감의 과도한 사용은 학습을 방해한다.
Yeah. This is a good place for a picnic.
⑤ 
②  장난감의 위생 상태를 확인할 필요가 있다.
③  장난감 총 사용 시 안전사고에 유의해야 한다.
④  장난감 종류에 따라 연령 제한을 두어야 한다.
2. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
⑤  장난감 총은 아이들에게 부정적인 영향을 미친다.
적절한 것을 고르시오.
No. You don’t have to pay the late fee.
①
Right. I’ll pay now and get the book later.
②
It’s my turn. So you have to wait until I’m done. 8. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
③
Okay. I’ll put your name on it, so you’ll be the next. 고르시오.
④
Why not? Wait here and I’ll go find the book for you.
⑤
3. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
It’s hard to endure the loss of a cherished puppy.
①
You shouldn’t have taken your eyes off the road.
②
You should break the habit of being late all the time.
③
Don’t worry. You can do it if you put your mind to it.
④
What a coincidence! I was about to drop by your house.
⑤
4. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오. 
①  주차 관리 요원을 모집하려고
②  요가 센터 개장을 홍보하려고 ①  서점 직원－고객 ②  연극 연출가－배우
③  주차장 확장 공사를 안내하려고 ③  동화 작가－독자 ④  도서관 사서－학생
④  체육 시설 안전 점검을 촉구하려고 ⑤  출판사 편집장－삽화가
⑤  새로운 요가 프로그램을 소개하려고
5. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을  10. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오. 고르시오.
①  배낚시 전 확인해야 할 안전 장비 ①  수업 참관하기
②  배낚시를 즐기는 다양한 방법 ②  만화 그려 주기
③  선상 화재의 주된 원인 ③  팸플릿 복사하기
④  연령에 따른 구명조끼의 종류 ④  읽기 자료 찾아 주기
⑤  배낚시 도구의 효과적인 관리 요령 ⑤  현장 학습 일정표 만들기
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
홀수형
11. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을  18. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
고르시오. 적절한 것을 고르시오.
to participate in the meeting to talk about the matter Man:
① 
to install a device in the car to record accidents
② 
You have to renew your driver’s license.
① 
to repair the damaged car before she gets back
③ 
I’ll let you take the midterm a second time.
② 
to prepare for a business trip with her customer
④ 
Then you should easily pass the test this time.
to watch the security video to find who hit the car ③ 
⑤ 
I don’t think memorizing is the best way to study.
④ 
No wonder you’re curious about your test results.
head chef ⑤ 
12. 대화를 듣고,  남자가  에 지원하지 못하는  이유를 
고르시오.
①  다음 주에 근무를 시작해야 해서 19. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
②  기숙사 생활을 해야 해서 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
③  호텔에서의 요리사 경력이 부족해서
Woman:
④  요리 대회 수상 실적이 없어서
⑤  프랑스어를 못해서 ①  And I’ll ask my teacher if that is permitted.
Then I should garden to relieve my stress.
② 
13. 대화를 듣고,  예술 작품을 이해하는 데 도움이 되는 것으로  I can do better if I conquer my indecision.
③ 
두 사람이 언급하지 않은  것을 고르시오. I promise to help you more in the garden.
④ 
So I should work on it a little every day.
① 작품의 주제 ② 예술가의 개인 정보 ⑤ 
③ 작품의 역사적 배경 ④ 작품에 대한 전문가의 견해
⑤ 작품에 사용된 재료
Paul Jennifer
20. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  이  에게 할 말로 가장 
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점] 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Paul:
$500 $600 $700 $1,000 $1,200
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
Would you fax me the document right away?
① 
Amazing Art Lovers
15. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지  Will you copy the document for the meeting?
② 
않는  것을 고르시오. If you don’t hurry, you’ll miss your flight.
③ 
43 I have no choice but to visit your office.
①  년의 역사를 가진 동아리이다. ④ 
10 Please check whether you got my fax.
②  지난  년 동안 지역 사회에서 자원 봉사를 해 왔다. ⑤ 
③  일주일 전에,  공장 벽에 그림을 그려 달라고 요청받았다.
④  전공에 관계없이 신입 회원을 찾고 있다.
⑤  전화번호가 웹사이트에 게시되어 있다.
[21～22] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
sausage tree
16. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 않는  것을 
21. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
고르시오.
reasons for extreme competition among animals for food
① 
①  비가 연중 내리는 곳에서 늘 푸르다.
how repeated changes in nature affect animal behavior
② 
②  빨간색 꽃이 해질 녘에 핀다.
drawbacks to animals’ adaptation to nature
③ 
③  꽃은 수분이 이루어지면 그다음 날 아침에 떨어진다.
how to preserve endangered wildlife effectively
④ 
④  열매는 소시지를 닮았고 먹을 수 있다.
types of threats from serious environmental changes
⑤  지역민들은 악령을 쫓아내기 위해 열매를 사용한다. ⑤ 
17. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택한 제품을 
22. 언급된 동물이 아닌  것은?
고르시오.
butterflies moths frogs
①  ②  ③ 
birds fish
④  ⑤ 
①
②
③
④   이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 23번부터는 문제지의 
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
홀수형
23. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 25. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
In  our  efforts  to  be  the  good  child,  the  uncomplaining  The  names  of  pitches  are  associated  with  particular 
employee, or the cooperative patient, many of us fall into the  frequency values. Our current system is called A440 because 
trap of trying to please people by going along with whatever  the note we call ‘A’ that is in the middle of the piano keyboard 
they  want  us  to  do.  At  times,  we  lose  track  of  our  own  has been fixed to have a frequency of 440 Hz. This is entirely 
boundaries and needs, and the cost of this could be our life,  arbitrary. We could fix ‘A’ at any frequency, such as 439 or 
both symbolically and literally. When we are unable to set  424; different standards were used in the time of Mozart than 
healthy limits, it causes distress in our relationships. But when  today. Some people claim that the precise frequencies affect 
we learn to say no to what we don’t feel like doing in order to  the  overall  sound  of  a  musical  piece  and  the  sound  of 
say  yes  to  our  true  self,  we  feel  empowered,  and  our  instruments. Led Zeppelin, a band popular in the 70s, often 
relationships with others improve. So don’t be afraid to say  tuned their instruments away from the modern A440 standard 
no. Try to catch yourself in the moment and use your true  to give their music an uncommon sound, and perhaps to link it 
voice to say what you really want to say. with the European children’s folk songs that inspired many of 
their compositions. Many purists insist on hearing baroque 
①  난관을 극복할 때 성취감이 생긴다.
music on period instruments, both because the instruments 
②  항상 타인의 입장을 먼저 고려해야 한다.
have a different sound and because they are designed to play 
③  자신이 원하지 않는 일은 거절할 필요가 있다.
the  music  in  its  original  tuning  standard,  something  that 
④  자신의 의견을 고집하면 대인 관계가 악화된다.
purists deem important.
⑤  제안을 승낙하기 전에는 그 의도를 파악해야 한다.
Should ‘A’ Always Be Tuned at 440 Hz?
①
Arbitrary Tuning: A New Trend in Music
②
How to Correctly Measure Frequency Values
③
How Do Musicians Detect Pitch Differences?
④
Unstable Pitches: A Common Thread in Music
⑤
24. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?
In order to successfully release himself from the control of 
his parents, a child must be secure in his parents’ power, as 
represented by their loving authority. The more effectively they 
communicate that authority, the more secure the child feels, and 
the better able he is to move away from them toward a life of his 
own. During this lengthy process, whenever he feels threatened, 
he  turns  back  toward  the  safety  of  his  parents’  love  and 
authority.  In  other  words,  it  is  impossible  for  a  child  to 
successfully release himself unless he knows exactly where his 
parents stand, both literally and figuratively. That requires, of 
26. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
course, that his parents know where they themselves stand. If 
A friend of mine was sitting in the Miami airport reading a 
they don’t know where they stand if, in other words, they are 
―
magazine while she waited to catch a plane to New York.  Her 
insecure in their authority they cannot communicate security 
―
attention was distracted by a rough, noisy quarrel taking place 
to their child, and he cannot move successfully away from 
at the ticket counter. “But I must get to New York today!” 
them.  Under  the  circumstances,  he  will  become  clingy,  or 
an angry lady hotly told the clerk. “I’m sorry, ma’am, but 
disobedient, or both. ①
there are no more seats available,” came the reply. “But my 
necessity  of  parental  intervention  in  ensuring  children’s 
① eight-year-old daughter is on that plane.  I can’t let her fly 
②
safety
into New York City all by herself,” she cried. “Sorry, lady. The 
roles  of  parental  authority  in  children’s  social  skills 
② flight is full,” came the same answer. My friend had been 
development
watching and listening to the woman’s woeful story, and her 
③ consequences of offering parental supervision for children’s  heart was touched with compassion for ③the distressed mother. 
independence She walked over to the ticket agent and offered to take a later 
requirements for preventing children from being disobedient  flight, if it meant the woman could use  her ticket to travel to 
④ ④
to their parents New York with her daughter. The agent welcomed my friend’s 
importance of communicating parental authority to children  solution and quickly issued a revalidated ticket to  the woman, 
⑤ ⑤
for their independence and then arranged for another flight for my friend.
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
홀수형
27. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점] 29. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Oxygen is what it is all about. Ironically, the stuff that gives 
us life eventually kills it. The ultimate life force lies in tiny 
cellular factories of energy, called mitochondria,  that burn 
①
nearly all the oxygen we breathe in. But breathing has a price. 
The combustion of oxygen that keeps us alive and active 
sending out by-products called oxygen free radicals. They 
②
have  Dr.  Jekyll  and  Mr.  Hyde  characteristics.  On  the  one 
hand, they help guarantee our survival. For example, when the 
body mobilizes  to fight off infectious agents, it generates a 
③
burst of free radicals to destroy the invaders very efficiently. 
On  the  other  hand,  free  radicals  move  uncontrollably 
④
through  the  body,  attacking  cells,  rusting  their  proteins, 
piercing their membranes and corrupting their genetic code 
until the cells become dysfunctional and sometimes give up 
and  die.  These  fierce  radicals,  built  into  life  as  both 
⑤ The graph above shows the Canadian volunteer rates and 
protectors and avengers, are potent agents of aging.
average annual hours of seven age groups in 2007.  In these 
①
*oxygen free radical: 활성 산소 groups, the volunteer rates ranged from 29% to 58%, and the 
**membrane: (해부학) 얇은 막 Canadian average rate was 46%. ②The average annual hours 
increased with age except for the group aged between 25 and 
34, which volunteered an average of 133 hours.  The 15-24 
③
age group showed the highest volunteer rate but the second 
fewest  average  annual  hours.  The  35-44  age  group  had 
④
fewer average annual hours than the 45-54 age group, while 
the 55-64 and 65-74 age groups showed the same average 
annual  hours.  Despite  their  lowest  rate  of  volunteering, 
⑤
seniors aged 75 and older gave more hours on average than 
any other age group.
Fourier
30. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier was a French mathematician 
and physicist. When he was eight years old, his father died, and 
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지  less than a year after this tragedy, his mother passed away, 
않은  것은?  [3점] leaving him an orphan. A charitable lady helped him attend a 
When people started to plant stored seed stock deliberately,  local military school. He wanted to become an officer but was 
they  also  began  protecting  their  plants.  This  changed  the  not allowed to because he was the son of a tailor. In 1795, he 
evolutionary  pressure that these food plants experienced, as  became a teacher at the École Normale in Paris. During the 
①
they  no  longer  had  to  survive  in  a  natural  environment.  post-Revolution frenzy, he spoke out against the use of the 
Instead,  people  created  a  new  environment  for  them,  and  guillotine, for which he almost lost his life. When Napoleon 
invaded Egypt in 1798, Fourier and other scholars accompanied 
selected for other characteristics than nature previously had. 
the expedition. Having returned to France, Fourier began his 
Seeds  recovered  at  archaeological  sites  clearly  show  that 
research on heat conduction. His mathematical theory of heat 
farmers selected for larger seeds and  thinner seed coats. 
②
conduction earned him lasting fame. During his stay in Egypt he 
Thick seed coats are often  essential for seeds to survive in 
③
contracted a strange illness that confined him to well-heated 
a natural environment because the seeds of many wild plants 
rooms for the rest of his life. On May 16, 1830, Fourier died in
remain dormant for months until winter is over and rain sets 
Paris.
in.  But  under  human  management  thick  seed  coats  are  *guillotine: 단두대
unnecessary,  as  farmers  evade  responsibility  for  storing 
④
①  프랑스의 수학자이자 물리학자였다.
seeds away from moisture and predators. In fact, seeds with 
②  재단사의 아들이라는 이유로 장교가 되지 못했다.
thinner coats were  preferred as they are easier to eat or 
⑤
③  단두대 사용에 반대하다가 목숨을 잃을 뻔했다.
process into flour, and they allow seedlings to sprout more 
④  열전도에 관한 수학 이론으로 명성을 얻었다.
quickly when sown.
⑤  이집트에서 프랑스로 돌아온 후 이상한 병에 걸렸다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
홀수형
[31～35] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 33. Policymaking is seen to be more objective when experts 
play a large role in the creation and implementation of the 
31. Sometimes all the outcomes customers are trying to achieve 
policy, and when utilitarian rationality is the dominant value 
in one area have a negative effect on other outcomes. This is 
that guides policy. Through the use of the scientific method to 
very common when companies are busy listening to the ‘voice 
determine the facts of any given policy situation, the power of 
of the customer.’ Traveling salespeople, for example, may say 
social constructions is supposedly diminished, and solutions to 
they want a smaller cell phone, but they may not have thought 
social  problems  are  discovered  in  an  objective  way.  This 
about how hard that tiny phone will be to use. Carpenters may 
process  creates  an  illusion  of  neutrality  and  implies  a 
request a lightweight circular saw without thinking about the 
transcendence  of  the  pitfalls  and  inequalities  commonly 
fact that it will no longer have the power to get through some of 
associated with policymaking. From this perspective, scientists 
the more difficult jobs. When customers make requests for new 
and  professionals  emerge  as  the  appropriate  experts  to  be 
product features, they are usually focused on solving just one 
consulted  in  policymaking,  while  local  citizen  input  and 
problem and are not thinking of how their requested solution 
knowledge  is  often  viewed  as  unnecessary.  Scientific  and 
will  . 
professional  policy  design  does  not  necessarily  escape  the 
In this situation, customers request new features but reject the  pitfalls  of  degenerative  politics.  Scientific  and  professional 
resulting product when they realize the ramifications of their  expertise often relies on a particular type of knowledge that is 
suggestions―the  added  feature  turns  out  to  be  worthless  limited to utility and rationality considerations. This approach 
because of the problems it causes. to policy typically does not consider values and cultural factors 
that cannot be measured empirically. Scientifically designed 
*ramification: 파생된 문제
policies  can  serve  interests  that  run  counter  to  the  public 
impact other product or service functions
①  interest. They  .
  [3점]
delay the introduction of innovative products
② 
*transcendence: 초월
induce other customers to make additional requests
③ 
use empirically proven theories to reflect locals’ input
bring about excessive competition among companies ①
④ 
do stress cultural values rather than utilitarian ones
discourage companies from listening to customers’ voices ②
⑤ 
may be free from the inequalities of policymaking
③
can reinforce unequal and unjust relationships
④
reveal objective solutions to social problems
⑤
32. The success of human beings depends crucially on numbers  34. Like many errors and biases that seem irrational on the 
and  connections.  A  few  hundred  people  cannot  sustain  a 
surface, auditory looming turns out, on closer examination, to 
sophisticated technology. Recall that Australia was colonized 
be pretty smart. Animals like rhesus monkeys have evolved 
45,000 years ago by pioneers spreading east from Africa along  the same bias. This intentional error functions as an advance 
the shore of Asia. The vanguard of such a migration must have  warning  system,  manned  by  the  self-protection  subself, 
been small in number and must have traveled comparatively  providing individuals with a margin of safety when they are 
light.  The  chances  are  they  had  only  a  sample  of  the  confronted with potentially dangerous approaching objects. 
technology available to their relatives back at the Red Sea  If  you  spot  a  rhinoceros  or  hear  an  avalanche  speeding 
crossing.  This  may  explain  why  Australian  aboriginal  toward you, auditory looming will motivate you to jump 
technology, although it developed and elaborated steadily over  out of the way now rather than wait until the last second. 
the ensuing millennia, was lacking in so many features of the  The evolutionary benefits of immediately getting out of the 
Old World elastic weapons, for example, such as bows and  way  of  approaching  dangers  were  so  strong  that  natural 
―
catapults, were unknown, as were ovens. It was not that they  selection  endowed  us―and  other  mammals―with  brains 
that  . Although 
were ‘primitive’ or that they had mentally regressed; it was 
this  kind  of  bias  might  inhibit  economically  rational 
that they   
judgment in laboratory tasks, it leads us to behave in a 
and did not have a dense enough population and therefore a 
deeply rational manner in the real world. Being accurate is not 
large enough collective brain to develop them much further.
  [3점]
always smart.
  [3점]
*catapult: 투석기 *avalanche: 눈사태
were too tightly connected to develop new technologies
① intentionally see and hear the world inaccurately
①
② focused on developing and elaborating elastic weapons ② are geared to evaluate aural information precisely
had arrived with only a subset of technologies deliberately make rational yet ineffective decisions
③ ③
inherited none of their relatives’ technologies in Africa prompt us to overlook dangers without thinking rationally
④ ④
failed to transfer their technical insights to the Old World accurately detect, but irrationally ignore, approaching dangers
⑤ ⑤
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
홀수형
35. Mathematics will attract those it can attract, but it will do  37. Oil and gas resources are not likely to be impacted by 
nothing to overcome resistance to science. Science is universal  climate change because they result from a process that takes 
in principle but in practice it speaks to very few. Mathematics  millions of years and are geologically trapped.  (A) , 
may be considered a communication skill of the highest type, 
climate change may not only force the shutting down of oil- 
frictionless  so  to  speak;  and  at  the  opposite  pole  from 
and  gas-producing  areas,  but  increase  the  possibility  of 
mathematics, the fruits of science show the practical benefits of 
exploration in areas of the Arctic through the reduction in ice 
science  without  the  use  of  words.  But  those  fruits  are 
cover.  Thus,  while  climate  change  may  not  impact  these 
ambivalent. Science as science does not speak; ideally, 
resources,  oil  and  gas  reserves  and  known  or  potential 
all  scientific  concepts  are  mathematized  when  scientists 
resources could be affected by new climate conditions, since 
communicate with one another, and when science displays its 
climate  change  may  affect  access  to  these  resources.  In 
products to non-scientists it need not, and indeed is not able to, 
resort to salesmanship. When science speaks to others, it is no  Siberia,  (B) , the actual exploration challenge is the 
longer science, and the scientist becomes or has to hire a  time required to access, produce, and deliver oil under extreme 
publicist who dilutes the exactness of mathematics. In doing  environmental  conditions,  where  temperatures  in  January 
so,  the  scientist  reverses  his  drive  toward  mathematical  range  from  20 to  35 .  Warming  may  ease  extreme 
— ℃  — ℃
exactness in favor of rhetorical vagueness and metaphor, thus  environmental conditions, expanding the production frontier.
.
  [3점]
(A) (B)
degrading his ability to use the scientific language needed 
① On the other hand however
① ……
for good salesmanship
On the other hand for instance
surmounting the barrier to science by associating science  ② ……
②
As a result for instance
with mathematics ③ ……
As a result however
inevitably making others who are unskillful in mathematics  ④ ……
③
hostile to science ⑤ In other words …… therefore
neglecting his duty of bridging the gap between science 
④
and the public
violating the code of intellectual conduct that defines him 
⑤
as a scientist
38. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?
[36～37] 다음 글의 빈칸 (A), (B)에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오. We  tend  to  perceive  the  door  of  a  classroom  as 
F.  Scott  Fitzgerald  thought  that  the  test  of  first-rate  rectangular  no  matter  from  which  angle  it  is  viewed. 
36.
intelligence was the ability to hold two opposed ideas in mind  Actually, the rectangular door of a classroom projects a 
at the same time and still function. The eons shaped our brains  rectangular image on our retina only when it is viewed 
in the  (A)  direction. Confirmation bias is a term for the  directly from the front.
way the mind systematically avoids confronting contradiction. 
It does this by overvaluing evidence that confirms what we  (A) Slowly the trapezoid becomes thinner and thinner, and all 
already think or feel and undervaluing or simply disregarding  that is projected on the retina is a vertical line, which is 
evidence that refutes it. Testimony from members of the Crow 
the thickness of the door. These changes we can observe 
tribe about the destruction of their culture provides an extreme 
and distinguish, but we do not accept them.
and  tragic  example  of  this.  A  man  named  Plenty  Coups 
(B) Similarly,  a  round  coin  is  seen  as  round  even  when 
reported that “when the buffalo went away, the hearts of my 
viewed  from  an  angle  at  which,  objectively,  it  should 
people fell to the ground and they could not lift them up again. 
After this nothing happened.” He was not alone in describing  appear elliptical. In the same way, we see car wheels as 
the depth of despair as the end of history. “Nothing happened  round, even though the retinal image is oval when viewed 
after that,” another Crow warrior said. “We just lived.” The  from an angle other than directly from the front.
emotion was so strong that the brain  (B)  evidence of the 
(C) At other angles, the image will be seen as a trapezoid. 
continued existence of normal, everyday life that might have
The edge of the door towards us looks wider than the 
eased it.
  [3점]
*eon: 무한히 긴 시대, 영겁 edge hinged with the frame.
(A) (B) (A) (B) *trapezoid: 사다리꼴   **elliptical: 타원형의
opposite retained opposite rejected (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
① …… ② …… ①  － － ②  － －
wrong validated same falsified (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③ …… ④ …… ③  － － ④  － －
⑤ same …… overlooked ⑤  (C)－(B)－(A)
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
홀수형
39. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한  [41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
곳은?
There is a difference between getting what you want and 
So, when someone is threatening to go to war, or trying to 
getting what you think you want. Technology gives us more 
convince us and mounting a huge public relations campaign 
and more of what we think we want. These days, looking at 
to  justify  it,  the  news  media  have  a  responsibility  to 
sociable robots and digitized friends, one might assume that 
question everything.
what we want is to be always in touch and never alone, no 
It’s important that the media provide us with diverse and  matter who or what we are in touch with. One might assume 
opposing views, so we can choose the best available options.  that  what  we  want  is  plenty  of  weak  ties,  the  informal 
Let’s take the example of going to war. ( ① )War should be  networks that underpin online acquaintanceship. But if we 
a last resort, obviously, undertaken when all other options 
pay attention to the real consequences of what we think we 
have failed. ( )They should be providing the most intense 
② want, we may discover what we really want. We may want 
scrutiny on our behalf, so the public can see the other side of 
some stillness and solitude. As an American writer once put 
things. ( ) Otherwise, we may be drawn into unnecessary 
③
it, we may want to live less ‘thickly’ and wait for more 
wars, or wars fought for reasons other than those presented 
infrequent but meaningful  . As we 
by governments and generals. ( ) Most of the time, the 
④
media fail to perform this crucial role. ( ⑤ ) Even the large,  put in our many hours of typing―with all fingers or just 
so-called ‘liberal’ American media have admitted that they  thumbs we may discover that we miss the human voice. 
―
have not always been watchdogs for the public interest, and  We may decide that it is fine to play chess with a robot, but 
that  their  own  coverage  on  some  major  issues  “looks 
that robots are unfit for any conversation about family or 
strikingly one-sided at times.”
friends. A robot might have needs, but to understand desire, 
*scrutiny: 면밀한 조사
one needs language and flesh. We may decide that for these 
conversations, we must have a person who knows, firsthand, 
(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
what it means to be born, to have parents and a family, to 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
wish for love and perhaps children, and to anticipate death. 
Low-balling  describes  the  technique  where  two  And, of course, we must not let the virtual take us away from 
individuals arrive at an agreement and then one increases 
the real world that doesn’t go away with a power outage.
the cost to be incurred by the other. For example, after the 
consumer has agreed to purchase a car for $8,000, the 
salesperson begins to add on $100 for tax and $200 for  41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
tires.  These  additional  costs  might  be  thought  of  as  a 
Plug In and Log On: Farewell to Loneliness
① 
metaphorical  ‘low  ball’  that  the  salesperson  throws  the 
Ethical Issues in the Online Community
② 
consumer.  One  explanation  for  the  effectiveness  of 
Humans and Robots: Friends or Foes?
③ 
low-balling is in terms of self-perception theory. When the 
Connected yet Detached in Virtuality
consumer agrees to purchase the product under the original  ④ 
Explore the Net, Go Beyond Reality
terms, that behavior might be used by the consumer to  ⑤ 
infer  his  sincere  interest  in  the  product.  This  inferred 
sincere interest in the product may enable him to endure 
the increased cost. An alternative explanation is in terms 
of impression management theory. If the consumer were 
to withdraw from the deal after the ‘slight’ change in the 
terms of agreement, he might foster the rather undesirable 
impression of being an irresponsible consumer unaware of 
these necessary charges.
󰀻
Low-balling  is  effective  in  sales  contexts  because  the 
consumer,  by  not  withdrawing  from  the  deal,  tends  to 
(A) his purchase decision or tries to save  (B) . 42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
adventurous endeavors
① 
(A) (B) (A) (B) technological outbursts
② 
justify time justify face face-to-face encounters
① …… ② …… ③ 
cherish time modify face dialogs with social robots
③ …… ④ …… ④ 
modify trouble supernatural interventions
⑤ …… ⑤ 
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
홀수형
(A)
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
(A) 가장 적절한 것은?
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
①  － － ②  － －
How much space do you need to be happy? Part of the 
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③  － － ④  － －
American story is that bigger is better, and with cheap credit 
(D) (C) (B)
⑤  － －
and tax breaks for home buyers, it’s tempting to stretch one’s 
finances to build or buy a larger house. My grandpa Otto 
chose a different path. (a)He didn’t want to find himself 
working longer and longer hours just to pay for more space 
and the stuff to fill it. He grew up in a farming community 
and within a very large family, so living simply was integral  (a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ∼   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
to his life philosophy.
것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
(B)
Yet my grandpa loved his little home and was content with 
what he had. Even though the house was small, it didn’t feel 
cramped. As my dad said, “Everyone was happy and content. 
The size of the house didn’t matter.” My grandpa taught me 
grandpa
45. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
that living a simple life isn’t about self-deprivation. Instead, 
it’s about giving yourself the time, freedom, and money to  ①  농촌 사회의 대가족 속에서 성장했다.
②  여러 가지 면에서 필자의 삶의 모델이 되었다.
pursue your dreams. In many ways, I’ve modeled my life after 
1950 600
③  년대에  제곱 피트의 집을 지었다.
that of my grandpa. I learned from (b)him that simplicity 
④  집을 짓는 데 필요한 대부분의 자재를 부두에서 구했다.
isn’t about austerity. It’s a revolution in personal growth. 
⑤  지역 사회의 급격한 변화를 알아차리지 못했다.
(C)
In the 1950s, when my dad was a little boy, my grandpa 
built a 600-square-foot cottage. (c)He put the twenty-by-
thirty-foot structure on a small plot of land in Pleasant Hill. 
Dad remarked, “Reusing and recycling was a necessity. In 
essence,  (d)he  was  recycling  before  it  became  ‘cool.’” 
Grandpa got most of the materials for his little house from 
the Oakland docks, where he was working. It took four years 
to build the small cottage, and when they moved in, the roof 
wasn’t even on!
(D)
My dad recalled looking up at the stars in the roofless 
house as a twelve-year-old kid before falling asleep. Dad 
didn’t mind living in an unfinished house. (e)He described 
Pleasant Hill as “open and private. It felt like all the homes 
were on ten acres.” Over the years, my dad and grandpa 
noticed  dramatic  changes  in  their  community.  Each  year 
more  farmland  was  devoured  to  build  strip  malls  and 
neighborhoods with larger homes. As real estate prices rose, 
many of their neighbors sold their homes and lots. Soon my 
*  확인 사항
grandpa had the only small house on the block, surrounded 
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
by a sea of homes four times the size of his dwelling.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2019학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
제 3 교시
짝수형
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
No. You can’t study with us.
①
Okay. I’ll do the report by myself. 
②
Sure. I’ll call you when I’m done.
③
Yes. I’m pleased to join your team.
④
Sorry. You have to finish by tomorrow.
⑤
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 고르시오.
① I’m sorry. Your son has to wait longer. ① 유인물 배부하기 ② 식용 곤충 조사하기
② Great. I’ll register my son for the program.  ③ 설문 조사 결과 분류하기  ④ 사진 촬영하기
③ Wonderful. Let’s attend the program together. ⑤ 발표 주제 정하기
I agree. The seats are very comfortable.
④
Be careful. The roads are slippery.
⑤
8. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 드론 비행 대회에 참가할 수 없는  이유를 
고르시오.
① 드론을 갖고 있지 않아서
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
② 파트너를 구하지 못해서
고르시오.
③ 졸업식에 참석해야 해서
① 시상식 일정 변경을 사과하려고 ④ 취업 면접에 가야 해서
② 웹 사이트 점검을 안내하려고 ⑤ 부모님이 방문하셔서
③ 경기장 개장을 홍보하려고
④ 팬클럽 가입을 권유하려고
9. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
⑤ 경기 취소를 공지하려고
$120 $140 $160 $180 $200
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
4. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 10. 대화를 듣고,  International Fireworks Festival에 관해 언급되지 
않은  것을 고르시오.
① 실패한 실험을 분석하면 실험에 성공할 수 있다.
② 과학 수업에서는 이론과 실습이 병행되어야 한다. ① 개최 일시 ② 개최 장소 ③ 참가국
③ 과학자가 되기 위해서는 인문학적 소양도 필요하다. ④ 주제 ⑤ 교통편 
④ 실험 일지는 실험 보고서 작성에 도움이 된다.
⑤ 실험을 할 때마다 안전 교육을 해야 한다.
2018 Upcycling Workshop
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
않는  것을 고르시오.
3
① 일간 진행될 것이다.
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
② 세미나실에서 열릴 것이다.
① 기증자－박물관 직원 ② 모델－사진작가 ③ 패션 디자이너가 가르칠 것이다.
③ 영화  관람객－티켓 판매원 ④ 인테리어 디자이너－건축가 ④ 모든 재료가 제공된다.
⑤ 고객－가구점 직원  ⑤ 참가 연령에 제한이 없다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
짝수형
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  여자가 구매할 도마를 고르시오. 18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Cutting Boards at Camilo’s Kitchen
Model Material Price Handle Size Dear Mr. Reese,
☓
A plastic $25 medium A few days ago, I submitted my application and recipe 
①
B maple $35 small for  the  2nd  Annual  DC  Metro  Cooking  Contest. 
② ☓◯
C maple $40 large However,  I  would  like  to  change  my  recipe  if  it  is 
③
possible. I have checked the website again, but I could 
D walnut $45 medium
④ ◯
only find information about the contest date, time, and 
E walnut $55 large
⑤ ◯
prizes. I couldn’t see any information about changing 
recipes. I have just created a great new recipe, and I 
13. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  believe people will love this more than the one I have 
already submitted. Please let me know if I can change 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
my submitted recipe. I look forward to your response.
Man:
Best Regards,
Absolutely! You should go and see a doctor. 
① Sophia Walker
No problem. I’ll visit you on my business trip. 
②
Sure. You can check the directions before driving.
③ ① 요리 대회 일정을 안내하려고
Okay. I’ll ask my team so I can take the medicine.
④ ② 요리 대회 심사 결과를 확인하려고
Right. Taking a trip is a great way to relieve stress.
⑤ ③ 요리법 변경 가능 여부를 문의하려고
④ 새로운 요리법 개발을 요청하려고
⑤ 요리 대회 불참을 통보하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Dave
19. 다음 글에 드러난  의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?
Woman:
The waves were perfect for surfing. Dave, however, just 
① Thanks. Then, I’ll read the novel before I watch the musical. could not stay on his board. He had tried more than ten times 
Great. I need a new musical instrument for our performance. to stand up but never managed it. He felt that he would never 
②
Good. Now, we should rewrite the script of the musical. succeed. He was about to give up when he looked at the sea 
③
one last time. The swelling waves seemed to say, “Come on, 
You’re right. Let’s wait for the reviews of the musical.
④
Dave. One more try!” Taking a deep breath, he picked up his 
I agree. The actors performed well in the musical.
⑤ board and ran into the water. He waited for the right wave. 
Finally, it came. He jumped up onto the board just like he had 
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  Steve가 Cathy에게 할 말로 가장  practiced. And this time, standing upright, he battled the wave 
all the way back to shore. Walking out of the water joyfully, he 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
cheered, “Wow, I did it!”
Steve:
frustrated delighted bored comforted
① → ② →
You’d better become more qualified as a volunteer.
① calm annoyed relieved frightened
③ → ④ →
You need to spend more time practicing translation. pleased upset
② ⑤ →
Why don’t you help me write a self-introduction letter?
③
How about volunteering together for the translation club?
④ 20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
You should highlight your volunteer experience as a translator.
⑤ War is inconceivable without some image, or concept, of the 
enemy. It is the presence of the enemy that gives meaning and 
justification to war. ‘War follows from feelings of hatred’, 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
wrote Carl Schmitt. ‘War has its own strategic, tactical, and other 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? rules and points of view, but they all presuppose that the political 
decision has already been made as to who the enemy is’. The 
why traditional foods are popular
① concept of the enemy is fundamental to the moral assessment 
② misconceptions about organic foods of war: ‘The basic aim of a nation at war in establishing an 
unexpected origins of common foods image of the enemy is to distinguish as sharply as possible the 
③
when foods spread across countries act of killing from the act of murder’. However, we need to be 
④
cautious about thinking of war and the image of the enemy 
importance of eating fresh foods
⑤
that informs it in an abstract and uniform way. Rather, both 
must be seen for the cultural and contingent phenomena that 
17. 언급된 음식이 아닌  것은? they are.
Caesar salad bagels kiwis *contingent: 불확정적인
① ② ③
④ potatoes ⑤ buffalo wings ① 전쟁과 적을 추상적이고 획일적으로 개념화하는 것을 경계해야 한다.
② 적에 따라 다양한 전략과 전술을 수립하고 적용해야 한다.
③ 보편적 윤리관에 기초하여 적의 개념을 정의해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
④ 전쟁 예방에 도움이 되는 정치적 결정을 해야 한다.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤ 어떠한 경우에도 전쟁을 정당화하지 말아야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
짝수형
refining ignorance
21. 밑줄 친  가 다음 글에서 의미하는 바로  23. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
가장 적절한 것은? We  argue  that  the  ethical  principles  of  justice  provide  an 
Although not the explicit goal, the best science can really be  essential foundation for policies to protect unborn generations 
seen as refining ignorance. Scientists, especially young ones,  and the poorest countries from climate change. Related issues 
can get too obsessed with results. Society helps them along in  arise in connection with current and persistently inadequate aid 
this mad chase. Big discoveries are covered in the press, show  for these nations, in the face of growing threats to agriculture and 
up on the university’s home page, help get grants, and make  water supply, and the rules of international trade that mainly 
the case for promotions. But it’s wrong. Great scientists, the  benefit  rich  countries.  Increasing  aid  for  the  world’s  poorest 
pioneers that we admire, are not concerned with results but  peoples can be an essential part of effective mitigation. With 20 
with the next questions. The highly respected physicist Enrico  percent of carbon emissions from (mostly tropical) deforestation, 
Fermi told his students that an experiment that successfully  carbon  credits  for  forest  preservation  would  combine  aid  to 
proves a hypothesis is a measurement; one that doesn’t is a  poorer countries with one of the most cost-effective forms of 
discovery. A discovery, an uncovering―of new ignorance.  abatement.  Perhaps  the  most  cost-effective  but  politically 
The Nobel Prize, the pinnacle of scientific accomplishment, is  complicated  policy  reform  would  be  the  removal  of  several 
awarded, not for a lifetime of scientific achievement, but for a  hundred billions of dollars of direct annual subsidies from the 
single discovery, a result. Even the Nobel committee realizes  two  biggest  recipients  in  the  OECD destructive  industrial 
―
in some way that this is not really in the scientific spirit, and  agriculture and fossil fuels. Even a small amount of this money 
their  award  citations  commonly  honor  the  discovery  for  would accelerate the already rapid rate of technical progress and 
having “opened a field up,” “transformed a field,” or “taken a  investment  in  renewable  energy  in  many  areas,  as  well  as 
field in new and unexpected directions.” encourage the essential switch to conservation agriculture.
*pinnacle: 정점 *mitigation: 완화 **abatement:  감소 ***subsidy: 보조금
looking beyond what is known towards what is left unknown
① reforming diplomatic policies in poor countries
①
offering an ultimate account of what has been discovered
② coping with climate change by reforming aid and policies
②
analyzing existing knowledge with an objective mindset
③ reasons for restoring economic equality in poor countries
③
inspiring scientists to publicize significant discoveries
④ increasing global awareness of the environmental crisis 
④
informing students of a new field of science
⑤ roles of the OECD in solving international conflicts
⑤
22. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 24. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
With the industrial society evolving into an information-based  A defining element of catastrophes is the magnitude of their 
society, the concept of information as a product, a commodity  harmful  consequences.  To  help  societies  prevent  or  reduce 
with its own value, has emerged. As a consequence, those people,  damage  from  catastrophes,  a  huge  amount  of  effort  and 
organizations,  and  countries  that  possess  the  highest-quality  technological sophistication are often employed to assess and 
information are likely to prosper economically, socially, and  communicate the size and scope of potential or actual losses. 
politically.  Investigations  into  the  economics  of  information  This effort assumes that people can understand the resulting 
encompass  a  variety  of  categories  including  the  costs  of  numbers  and  act  on  them  appropriately.  However,  recent 
information and information services; the effects of information  behavioral research casts doubt on this fundamental assumption. 
on decision making; the savings from effective information  Many people do not understand large numbers. Indeed, large 
acquisition; the effects of information on productivity; and the  numbers  have  been  found  to  lack  meaning  and  to  be 
effects of specific agencies (such as corporate, technical, or  underestimated in decisions unless they convey affect (feeling). 
medical libraries) on the productivity of organizations. Obviously  This creates a paradox that rational models of decision making 
many of these areas overlap, but it is clear that information has  fail to represent. On the one hand, we respond strongly to aid a 
taken on a life of its own outside the medium in which it is  single individual in need. On the other hand, we often fail to 
contained. Information has become a recognized entity to be  prevent mass tragedies or take appropriate measures to reduce 
measured, evaluated, and priced. potential losses from natural disasters.
*entity: 실재(물) *catastrophe: 큰 재해
Be Careful, Numbers Magnify Feelings!
① 정보 기반 사회에서는 정보를 전달하는 방식이 중요하다. ①
Preventing Potential Losses Through Technology
② 정보 기반 사회에서 정보는 독자적 상품 가치를 지닌다.  ②
How to Reach Out a Hand to People in Desperate Need
③ 정보 처리의 단순화는 신속한 의사 결정에 도움이 된다. ③
Power of Numbers: A Way of Classifying Natural Disasters
④ 정보의 효율적 교환은 조직의 생산성을 향상시킨다. ④
Insensitivity to Mass Tragedy: We Are Lost in Large Numbers
⑤ 정보화된 사회일수록 개인 정보 보호가 필요하다. ⑤
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
짝수형
Flying Eagle Zipline Ride
25. 다음 표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에  관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
Top Ten Origin Countries of International Students 일치하지 않는  것은?
(School Years 1979-1980 and 2016-2017)
School Year 1979-1980 School Year 2016-2017
Flying Eagle Zipline Ride
Country Number Country Number
Iran 51,000 China 351,000 Soar through the treetops over Lost Forest on our thrilling 
Taiwan 18,000 India 186,000 Flying Eagle Zipline! Feel the thrill of flying like an eagle!
Nigeria 16,000 South Korea 59,000
Age requirement: 13 years old and over
Canada 15,000 Saudi Arabia 53,000 ∙
Japan 12,000 Canada 27,000 ∙Price:￡20
Hong Kong 10,000 Vietnam 22,000 Zipline length: 500 metres
∙
Venezuela 10,000 Taiwan 22,000 Duration: 30 minutes
∙
Saudi Arabia 10,000 Japan 19,000
(including safety instruction)
India 9,000 Mexico 17,000
Restrictions:
∙
Thailand 7,000 Brazil 13,000
People with back problems
Other countries 129,000 Other countries 311,000 －
or serious heart conditions
Total 286,000 Total 1,079,000
Weight: over 125 kg
Note: Detail may not add to total shown because of rounding. －
∙
Height: under 120 cm
－
The tables above show the top ten origin countries and the 
We do not take responsibility for lost valuables.
number of international students enrolled in U.S. colleges and  ※
No advanced reservations are necessary.
universities in two school years, 1979-1980 and 2016-2017.  ※
The total number of international students in 2016-2017  Please visit our website at www.flyingeaglezip.co.uk for 
①
was  over  three  times  larger  than  the  total  number  of  more information.
international  students  in  1979-1980.  Iran,  Taiwan,  and 
②
Nigeria were the top three origin countries of international 
13
① 세 이상부터 탈 수 있다.
students  in  1979-1980,  among  which  only  Taiwan  was 
500
included  in  the  list  of  the  top  ten  origin  countries  in  ② 집라인의 길이는  미터이다.
2016-2017.  The number of students from India was over  ③ 체중 제한이 있다.
③
twenty times larger in 2016-2017 than in 1979-1980, and India  ④ 분실한 귀중품에 대해 책임을 지지 않는다. 
ranked  higher  than  China  in  2016-2017. South  Korea, 
④ ⑤ 사전 예약이 필요하다.
which was not included among the top ten origin countries in 
1979-1980,  ranked  third  in  2016-2017. Although  the 
⑤ Wireless Charging Pad
28.   사용에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 
number of students from Japan was larger in 2016-2017 than 
in  1979-1980,  Japan  ranked  lower  in  2016-2017  than  in  일치하는 것은?
1979-1980.
Wireless Charging Pad
Instructions
－ －
Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings
26. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치 Wireless Smartphone Charging: 
하지 않는  것은? 1. Connect the charging
Marjorie  Kinnan  Rawlings,  an  American  author  born  in  pad to a power source.
Washington, D.C. in 1896, wrote novels with rural themes and  2. Place your smartphone on 
the charging pad with the 
settings. While she was young, one of her stories appeared in 
display facing up.
The  Washington  Post.  After  graduating  from  university, 
3. Place your smartphone on
Rawlings worked as a journalist while simultaneously trying 
the center of the charging
to establish herself as a fiction writer. In 1928, she purchased 
pad (or it will not charge).
an orange grove in Cross Creek, Florida. This became the 
source of inspiration for some of her writings which included  Charge Status LED:
The Yearling and her autobiographical book, Cross Creek. In  Blue Light: Your smartphone is charging. If there’s
∙
1939, The Yearling, which was about a boy and an orphaned  a problem, the blue light will flash.
baby deer, won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. Later, in 1946,  ∙White Light: Your smartphone is fully charged.
The  Yearling  was  made  into  a  film  of  the  same  name. 
Caution:
Rawlings passed away in 1953, and the land she owned at 
Do not place anything between your smartphone and
∙
Cross Creek has become a Florida State Park honoring her 
the charging pad while charging.
achievements. The charging pad is not water-resistant. Keep it dry. 
∙
*grove: 과수원
Washington, D.C.
① 에서 태어난 미국 작가이다. ① 스마트폰의 화면을 아래로 향하게 두어야 한다.
The Washington Post
② 그녀의  이야기 중 하나가  에 실렸다. ② 스마트폰을 충전 패드 중앙에 놓지 않아도 된다.
LED 
③ 대학교를 졸업한 후 저널리스트로 일했다. ③ 빛이 흰색이면 스마트폰이 완전히 충전되지 않은 것이다.
The Yearling
④ 이라는 소설은 다른 제목으로 영화화되었다. ④ 스마트폰과 충전 패드 사이에 어떤 것도 놓지 않아야 한다.
Cross Creek Florida 
⑤ 에 소유했던 땅은  주립 공원이 되었다. ⑤ 충전 패드는 방수가 된다.
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
짝수형
29. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점] [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
“Monumental” is a word that comes very close to ①expressing  31. Finkenauer  and  Rimé  investigated  the  memory  of  the 
the  basic  characteristic  of  Egyptian  art.  Never  before  and 
unexpected death of Belgium’s King Baudouin in 1993 in a 
never since has the quality of monumentality been achieved as  large sample of Belgian citizens. The data revealed that the 
fully  as  it  ②did  in  Egypt.  The  reason  for  this  is  not  the  news of the king’s death had been widely socially shared. By 
external size and massiveness of their works, although the  talking about the event, people gradually constructed a social 
Egyptians admittedly achieved some amazing things in this  narrative and a collective memory of the emotional event. At 
respect. Many modern structures exceed  those of Egypt in  the same time, they consolidated their own memory of the 
③
terms of purely physical size. But massiveness has nothing to  personal  circumstances  in  which  the  event  took  place,  an 
do with monumentality. An Egyptian sculpture no bigger than  effect known as “flashbulb memory.” The more an event is 
a person’s hand is more monumental than that gigantic pile of  socially shared, the more it will be fixed in people’s minds. 
stones  that  constitutes  the  war  memorial  in  Leipzig,  for  Social sharing may in this way help to counteract some natural 
④
instance. Monumentality is not a matter of external weight, but  tendency people may have. Naturally, people should be driven 
to “forget” undesirable events. Thus, someone who just heard 
of  “inner  weight.”  This  inner  weight  is  the  quality  which 
a piece of bad news often tends initially to deny what happened. 
Egyptian art possesses to such a degree that everything in it 
The social sharing of the bad news contributes to 
seems to be made of primeval stone, like a mountain range, 
realism.
even if it is only a few inches across or  carved in wood.
⑤
*consolidate: 공고히 하다
*gigantic: 거대한 **primeval: 원시 시대의 repetitive illegal biased
① ② ③
temporary rational
④ ⑤
32. Minorities tend not to have much power or status and may 
even  be  dismissed  as  troublemakers,  extremists  or  simply 
‘weirdos’. How, then, do they ever have any influence over the 
majority? The social psychologist Serge Moscovici claims that 
the  answer  lies  in  their  behavioural  style,  i.e.  the  way
 
. The crucial factor 
in  the  success  of  the  suffragette  movement  was  that  its 
supporters were consistent in their views, and this created a 
 
30. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지  considerable degree of social influence. Minorities that are 
않은  것은? active and organised, who support and defend their position 
Europe’s first Homo sapiens lived primarily on large game,  consistently, can create social conflict, doubt and uncertainty 
particularly  reindeer.  Even  under  ideal  circumstances,  hunting  among members of the majority, and ultimately this may lead 
these fast animals with spear or bow and arrow is an  uncertain  to social change. Such change has often occurred because a 
①
task. The reindeer, however, had a  weakness that mankind  minority has converted others to its point of view. Without the 
②
would mercilessly exploit: it swam poorly. While afloat, it is  influence  of  minorities,  we  would  have  no  innovation,  no 
uniquely  vulnerable, moving slowly with its antlers held high  social change. Many of what we now regard as ‘major’ social 
③
as it struggles to keep its nose above water. At some point, a  movements  (e.g.  Christianity,  trade  unionism  or  feminism) 
were originally due to the influence of an outspoken minority. 
Stone Age genius realized the enormous hunting  advantage he 
④
would gain by being able to glide over the water’s surface, and  *dismiss: 일축하다 **weirdo: 별난 사람
built the first boat. Once the ⑤laboriously overtaken and killed  ***suffragette: 여성 참정권론자
prey had been hauled aboard, getting its body back to the tribal  the minority cooperates with the majority
①
camp would have been far easier by boat than on land. It would  the majority brings about social change
②
not have taken long for mankind to apply this advantage to other  the majority cultivates the minority
③
goods. the minority tones down its voice
④
*exploit: 이용하다 **haul: 끌어당기다 ⑤ the minority gets its point across
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
짝수형
33. Heritage is concerned with the ways in which very selective  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
material  artefacts,  mythologies,  memories  and  traditions 
When photography came along in the nineteenth century, 
become resources for the present. The contents, interpretations 
painting was put in crisis. The photograph, it seemed, did 
and representations of the resource are selected according to 
the work of imitating nature better than the painter ever could. 
the  demands  of  the  present;  an  imagined  past  provides 
Some painters made practical use of the invention.  There 
① ②
resources for a heritage that is to be passed onto an imagined 
were Impressionist painters who used a photograph in place of 
future.  It  follows  too  that  the  meanings  and  functions  of 
the  model  or  landscape they  were  painting.  But  by  and 
③
memory  and  tradition  are  defined  in  the  present.  Further, 
large, the photograph was a challenge to painting and was one 
heritage  is  more  concerned  with  meanings  than  material 
cause of painting’s moving away from direct representation 
artefacts. It is the former that give value, either cultural or 
and  reproduction  to  the  abstract  painting  of  the  twentieth 
financial, to the latter and explain why they have been selected 
century.  Therefore, the painters of that century put more 
from the near infinity of the past. In turn, they may later be  ④
focus on expressing nature, people, and cities as they were 
discarded as the demands of present societies change, or even, 
in  reality. Since  photographs  did  such  a  good  job  of 
as is presently occurring in the former Eastern Europe, when  ⑤
representing things as they existed in the world, painters were 
pasts  have  to  be  reinvented  to  reflect  new  presents.  Thus 
freed to look inward and represent things as they were in their 
heritage is .
  [3점]
imagination, rendering emotion in the color, volume, line, and 
about preserving universal cultural values
①
spatial configurations native to the painter’s art.
a mirror reflecting the artefacts of the past
②
③ neither concerned with the present nor the future *render: 표현하다 ** configuration: 배치 
as much about forgetting as remembering the past
④
a collection of memories and traditions of a society
⑤
[36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
것을 고르시오.
36.
Researchers in psychology follow the scientific method 
to perform studies that help explain and may predict human 
behavior. This is a much more challenging task than studying 
34. The  human  species  is  unique  in  its  ability  to  expand  its  snails or sound waves.
functionality by inventing new cultural tools. Writing, arithmetic, 
(A) But for all of these difficulties for psychology, the payoff 
science all  are  recent  inventions.  Our  brains  did  not  have 
―
enough time to evolve for them, but I reason that they were made  of the scientific method is that the findings are replicable; 
possible because .  that is, if you run the same study again following the 
When we learn to read, we recycle a specific region of our  same procedures, you will be very likely to get the same 
visual system known as the visual word-form area, enabling us  results.
to recognize strings of letters and connect them to language 
(B) It often requires compromises, such as testing behavior 
areas. Likewise, when we learn Arabic numerals we build a 
within laboratories rather than natural settings, and asking 
circuit to quickly convert those shapes into quantities a fast 
― those readily available (such as introduction to psychology 
connection from bilateral visual areas to the parietal quantity 
students) to participate rather than collecting data from a 
area. Even an invention as elementary as finger-counting changes 
true cross-section of the population. It often requires great 
our cognitive abilities dramatically. Amazonian people who have 
cleverness  to  conceive  of  measures  that  tap  into  what 
not invented counting are unable to make exact calculations as 
people are thinking without altering their thinking, called 
simple as, say, 6 2. This “cultural recycling” implies that the 
—
reactivity. 
functional architecture of the human brain results from a complex 
mixture of biological and cultural constraints.  (C) Simply  knowing  they  are  being  observed  may  cause 
[3점]
people  to  behave  differently  (such  as  more  politely!). 
*bilateral: 양측의 **parietal: 정수리(부분)의
***constraint: 제약 People may give answers that they feel are more socially 
desirable than their true feelings. 
our brains put a limit on cultural diversity
①
we can mobilize our old areas in novel ways  *replicable: 반복 가능한
②
cultural tools stabilize our brain functionality (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ ① － － ② － －
our brain regions operate in an isolated manner (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
④ ③ － － ④ － －
we cannot adapt ourselves to natural challenges (C) (B) (A)
⑤ ⑤ － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
짝수형
37. 39.
Clearly, schematic knowledge helps you guiding your  A round hill rising above a plain, therefore, would appear 
―
understanding and enabling you to reconstruct things you  on the map as a set of concentric circles, the largest at the 
base and the smallest near the top.
cannot remember. 
A major challenge for map-makers is the depiction of hills and 
(A) Likewise,  if  there  are  things  you  can’t  recall,  your 
valleys, slopes and flatlands collectively called the topography. 
schemata  will  fill  in  the  gaps  with  knowledge  about 
This can be done in various ways. One is to create an image of 
what’s typical in that situation. As a result, a reliance on 
sunlight and shadow so that  wrinkles of the topography are 
schemata  will  inevitably  make  the  world  seem  more 
alternately lit and shaded, creating a visual representation of the 
“normal” than it really is and will make the past seem  shape of the land. ( ) Another, technically more accurate 
①
more “regular” than it actually was. way is to draw contour lines. ( ) A contour line connects all 
②
points that lie at the same elevation. ( ) When the contour 
(B) Any reliance on schematic knowledge, therefore, will be  ③
lines are positioned closely together, the hill’s slope is steep; if 
shaped by this information about what’s “normal.” Thus, 
they lie farther apart, the slope is gentler. ( ) Contour lines 
④
if  there  are  things  you  don’t  notice  while  viewing  a 
can  represent  scarps,  hollows,  and  valleys  of  the  local 
situation or event, your schemata will lead you to fill in 
topography. ( ) At a glance, they reveal whether the relief in 
⑤
these “gaps” with knowledge about what’s normally in  the mapped area is great or small: a “busy” contour map means 
place in that setting.  lots of high relief.
[3점]
(C) But schematic knowledge can also hurt you, promoting  *concentric: 중심이 같은 **scarp: 가파른 비탈
errors in perception and memory. Moreover, the types of  ***relief: (토지의)  고저,  기복
errors produced by schemata are quite predictable: Bear in 
mind that schemata summarize the broad pattern of your  (A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  , 
experience, and so they tell you, in essence, what’s typical  (B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
or ordinary in a given situation. 
[3점]
Biological organisms, including human societies both with 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
① － － ② － － and without market systems, discount distant outputs over 
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B) those available at the present time based on risks associated 
③ － － ④ － －
(C) (B) (A) with an uncertain future. As the timing of inputs and outputs 
⑤ － －
varies greatly depending on the type of energy, there is a 
strong  case  to  incorporate  time  when  assessing  energy 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장  alternatives. For example, the energy output from solar panels 
적절한 곳을 고르시오. or  wind  power  engines,  where  most  investment  happens 
before  they  begin  producing,  may  need  to  be  assessed 
38.
differently  when  compared  to  most  fossil  fuel  extraction 
The  advent  of  literacy  and  the  creation  of  handwritten  technologies, where a large proportion of the energy output 
scrolls and, eventually, handwritten books strengthened the  comes  much  sooner,  and  a  larger  (relative)  proportion  of 
inputs  is  applied  during  the  extraction  process,  and  not 
ability  of  large  and  complex  ideas  to  spread  with  high 
upfront. Thus fossil fuels, particularly oil and natural gas, in 
fidelity.
addition to having energy quality advantages (cost, storability, 
transportability, etc.) over many renewable technologies, also 
The  printing  press  boosted  the  power  of  ideas  to  copy 
have  a  “temporal  advantage”  after  accounting  for  human 
themselves. Prior to low-cost printing, ideas could and did 
behavioral preference for current consumption/return.
spread  by  word  of  mouth.  While  this  was  tremendously 
powerful, it limited the complexity of the ideas that could be  󰀻 *upfront: 선행 투자의
propagated to those that a single person could remember. ( ) 
①
It also added a certain amount of guaranteed error. ( ) The 
② Due to the fact that people tend to favor more  (A)  
spread of ideas by word of mouth was equivalent to a game of  outputs, fossil fuels are more (B)  than renewable 
telephone on a global scale. ( ) But the incredible amount  energy alternatives in regards to the distance between inputs 
③
of time required to copy a scroll or book by hand limited the  and outputs.
speed with which information could spread this way. ( ) A 
④
(A) (B)
well-trained monk could transcribe around four pages of text 
immediate competitive
① ……
per  day.  ( )  A  printing  press  could  copy  information 
⑤ available expensive
② ……
thousands of times faster, allowing knowledge to spread far 
delayed competitive
③ ……
more quickly, with full fidelity, than ever before.
convenient expensive
④ ……
*fidelity: 충실 **propagate: 전파하다 ⑤ abundant …… competitive
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
짝수형
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
The caterpillars wriggled as they were picked up while 
Industrial capitalism not only created work, it also created 
Cabbage Whites filled the air around them. It was as if the 
‘leisure’ in the modern sense of the term. This might seem 
butterflies were making fun of Olivia; they seemed to be 
surprising, for the early cotton masters wanted to keep their 
laughing at (b)her, suggesting that they would lay millions 
machinery running as long as possible and forced their employees 
more  eggs.  The  cabbage  patch  looked  like  a  battlefield. 
to work very long hours. However, by requiring continuous  Olivia felt like she was losing the battle, but she fought on. 
work during work hours and ruling out non-work activity,  (c)She kept filling her bucket with the caterpillars until the 
employers had (a)separated out leisure from work. Some did  bottom disappeared. Feeling exhausted and discouraged, she 
this quite explicitly by creating distinct holiday periods, when  asked  Grandma,  “Why  don’t  we  just  get  rid  of  all  the 
factories were shut down, because it was better to do this  butterflies, so that there will be no more eggs or caterpillars?”
than have work (b)promoted by the casual taking of days off.  *wriggle: 꿈틀거리다
‘Leisure’ as a distinct non-work time, whether in the form of 
(C)
the holiday, weekend, or evening, was a result of the disciplined 
and  bounded  work  time  created  by  capitalist  production.  Soon, armed with a small bucket each, Olivia and Ellie 
Workers  then  wanted  more  leisure  and  leisure  time  was  went back to Grandma. When they saw the cabbage patch, 
enlarged by union campaigns, which first started in the cotton  they suddenly remembered how vast it was. There seemed to 
be  a  million  cabbages.  Olivia  stood  open-mouthed  at  the 
industry, and eventually new laws were passed that (c)limited 
sight of the endless cabbage field. She thought they could 
the hours of work and gave workers holiday entitlements.
not possibly pick all of the caterpillars off. Olivia sighed in 
Leisure  was  also  the  creation  of  capitalism  in  another 
despair. Grandma smiled at her and said, “Don’t worry. We 
sense,  through  the  commercialization  of  leisure.  This  no 
are only working on this first row here today.” Relieved, 
longer meant participation in traditional sports and pastimes. 
(d)she and Ellie started on the first cabbage.
Workers began to (d)pay for leisure activities organized by 
capitalist enterprises. Mass travel to spectator sports, especially 
(D)
football and horse-racing, where people could be charged for 
Grandma smiled gently and said, “Why wrestle with Mother 
entry, was now possible. The importance of this can hardly 
Nature?  The  butterflies  help  us  grow  some  other  plants 
be exaggerated, for whole new industries were emerging to 
because they carry pollen from flower to flower.” Olivia 
exploit and (e)develop the leisure market, which was to become 
realized (e)she was right. Grandma added that although 
a huge source of consumer demand, employment, and profit.
she knew caterpillars did harm to cabbages, she didn’t wish 
*discipline: 통제하다 **enterprise: 기업(체) to disturb the natural balance of the environment. Olivia 
***exaggerate: 과장하다 now  saw  the  butterflies’  true  beauty.  Olivia  and  Ellie 
looked at their full buckets and smiled.
*pollen: 꽃가루 
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
What It Takes to Satisfy Workers
① (A)
43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Why Workers Have Struggled for More Leisure
②
가장 적절한 것은?
The Birth and Evolution of Leisure in Capitalism
③
How to Strike a Balance Between Work and Leisure (B) (D) (C)  (C)  (B) (D)
④ ① － － ② － －
The Light and Dark Sides of the Modern Leisure Industry (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
⑤ ③ － － ④ － －
(D)  (C) (B)
⑤ － －
(a) (e)
42. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 않은 
(a) (e)
것은?  [3점] 44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) 것은?
①   ② ③ ④ ⑤
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
45. 윗글에 관한 내용으로 적절하지 않은  것은?
(A)
Olivia Ellie
① 할머니는  와  에게 도움을 요청했다.
Olivia and her sister Ellie were standing with Grandma in 
Olivia Ellie
② 와  는 양배추밭에 있는 애벌레를 잡지 않았다.
the middle of the cabbages. Suddenly, Grandma asked, “Do 
Olivia
you know what a Cabbage White is?” “Yes, (a)I learned about  ③ 에게 양배추밭은 마치 전쟁터 같았다.
Olivia Ellie
it  in  biology  class.  It’s  a  beautiful  white  butterfly,”  Olivia  ④ 와  는 양배추밭이 얼마나 드넓은지 새삼 깨달았다.
Olivia
answered. “Right! But it lays its eggs on cabbages, and then  ⑤ 할머니는  에게 자연의 섭리를 일깨워주었다.
the caterpillars eat the cabbage leaves! So, why don’t you help 
me to pick the caterpillars up?” Grandma suggested. The two 
*  확인 사항
sisters gladly agreed and went back to the house to get ready.
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
*caterpillar: 애벌레 하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2016학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
제 3 교시
홀수형
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
No, thanks. I’ll have one later. 
① 
Sure. Take as many as you want.   
② 
Well, he’s quite a diligent farmer.
③ 
Sorry, but apples aren’t my favorite.
④ 
Good idea. Let’s buy them at the market.
⑤ 
7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 
2. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
①  학급 친구들 인터뷰하기
적절한 것을 고르시오.
②  조별 발표 순서 정하기
Don’t worry. The forecast says it’ll clear up soon.
①  ③  인터넷 자료 검색하기
You’re too late. Your flight already departed.
②  ④  발표 주제 선정하기
③  Then, I’d like to get a refund for this ticket. ⑤  과학 과제 제출하기
That’s right. We can reschedule your meeting.
④ 
No problem. We’ll change your seat to the aisle side.
⑤ 
8. 대화를  듣고,  남자가  팀  회식에  참석할  수  없는  이유를 
고르시오.
①  아버지와 저녁 식사를 해야 해서
3. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  ②  어머니 병문안을 가야 해서 
고르시오. ③  해외 출장을 가야 해서
④  팀 프로젝트 준비를 해야 해서
①  컴퓨터 사용 시 올바른 자세에 대해 조언하려고
⑤  아버지 생신 선물을 사러 가야 해서
②  컴퓨터 사용 중 휴식의 필요성을 강조하려고 
③  컴퓨터 사용 관련 절전 요령을 설명하려고
④  회사 내 컴퓨터 보안 강화 방침을 안내하려고
9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
⑤  직장 내 컴퓨터 개인 용무 사용 자제를 당부하려고
$27 $30 $35 $36 $40
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
Young Inventors Challenge
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 의견으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  10. 대화를 듣고,  에 관해 두 사람이 
언급하지 않은  것을 고르시오.
①  교사는 수업 시 학생들의 개인차를 고려할 필요가 있다.
①  참가 연령 ②  지원 마감일 ③  대회 장소 
②  원만한 교우 관계는 학습 동기를 강화시킨다. 
④  참가비 ⑤  우승 상품
③  게임을 이용한 수업은 학습에 도움이 된다. 
④  효과적인 수업을 위한 게임 개발이 중요하다.
⑤  조용한 학습 분위기가 수업 진행에 필수적이다. Sunnyvale Community Closet
11. 에  관한  다음  내용을  듣고, 
일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
①  비영리 단체가 운영한다. 
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
②  기증받기 전에 기기가 작동하는지 점검한다. 
①  치과 접수원－환자 ②  보건 교사－학생   ③  기기 보관을 위한 공간이 제한적이다.     
5
③  심리 상담사－내담자 ④  약사－제약 회사 직원 ④  주말에는 오후  시까지 연다.
⑤  보험 설계사－고객  ⑤  기증자에게 회원 카드를 발급한다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
홀수형
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  여자가 보러 가기로 선택한  18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
아파트를 고르시오. 
Apartments in Westford Village
Dear Coach Johnson,
Number of  Walking Distance Monthly
Apartment Floor My name is Christina Markle, Bradley Markle’s mother. 
Bedrooms from Downtown Rental Cost
Bradley and I were thrilled to learn that you’re holding 
A one 5 minutes 8th $600
①
your Gymnastics Summer Camp again this year. So I 
B two 5 minutes 3rd $700
②
didn’t hesitate to sign up and pay the non-refundable 
C two 15 minutes 6th $650
③
deposit for the second week program, which is from July 
D three 15 minutes 4th $750
④
13 to 17. But today I remembered that our family is 
E three 25 minutes 2nd $700
⑤
going to get back from a trip on July 13, and I’m afraid 
Bradley won’t be able to make it on the very first day of 
13. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  the program. Rather than make him skip the day, I’d like 
to check to see if he could switch to the third week 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Man: program. Please let us know if that’s possible. Thank you.
That’s too bad. The submission date has passed.  Sincerely,
① 
Christina Markle
Sure. They’ll make a back-up file just in case. 
② 
Trust yourself. Your efforts will pay off. 
③ 
It’s not your fault. Wait for another chance.  ①  캠프 참가를 위해 여행 일정을 조정하려고
④ 
②  캠프 참가 시기를 변경할 수 있는지 문의하려고
No problem. The directors’ meeting was canceled.
⑤ 
③  캠프 등록 시 지불한 예치금 환불을 요구하려고
④  캠프 일정이 분명하지 않은 것에 대해 항의하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ⑤  예약한 캠프 프로그램의 변경된 내용을 확인하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
I
Woman: 19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘ ’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?
I’m leaving early tomorrow morning, finally! I’ve always 
Right. I’d like to send this package by express mail.
① 
wanted to explore the Amazon, the unknown and mysterious 
Yes. I want to buy some stamps to put on this letter. 
② 
world. At this hour, the great Emerald Amazon Explorer should 
Great! Please give me the whole flower series now.
③ 
be at the port waiting for me to get on board. Freshwater dolphins 
That’s good. But those aren’t the stamps you want.
④  will escort me on the playful river, and 500 species of birds, half 
Thanks! I’ll go there now before they’re sold out.
⑤  a dozen species of monkeys, and numerous colorful butterflies 
will welcome me into their kingdom. I wish I could camp in the 
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  David가 Jane에게 할 말로 가장  wild and enjoy the company of mosquitos, snakes, and spiders. 
I’d love to make the world’s largest rainforest home. My heart 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
swells as much as my chubby bags; yet, I’d better get some sleep 
David:
since a long, tough journey is ahead of me.  
I’m going to hire you as my speechwriter.
① 
excited exhausted frustrated
You’re the right person to give me advice.  ①    ②  ③ 
② 
indifferent relieved
I wouldn’t make a single change if I were you. ④  ⑤ 
③ 
You should’ve written the speech on your own. 
④ 
20. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? 
I think it’s better to soften the speech a little bit.
⑤ 
Assertiveness may seem to some people to be uncharacteristic 
of counselors. If your picture of a counselor is someone who 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오. never disagrees, always “goes along,” wants everything to be 
nice all the time, and only does what other people want himor 
16. 남자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? 
her to do, this is not a picture of an assertive counselor. Being 
avoiding insect bites in the wild
① 
assertive does not have to mean being disagreeable. Being a 
distinguishing species of insects
②  counselor does not mean that you should simply be silent 
insects’ self-protection methods
③  when  someone  tells  a  racist  joke.  An  assertive  counselor 
④  means of saving endangered insects would find a way to call that person’s attention to the fact 
a variety of insects’ hunting techniques that the joke is racist, explaining how it offended the hearer, 
⑤ 
and suggesting ways similar jokes could be avoided. Being 
assertive is a highly developed skill it should fit nicely in 
17. 언급된 곤충이 아닌  것은?  ―
the counselor’s repertoire of techniques.
ants butterflies beetles
①  ②  ③ 
grasshoppers bees ① 상담사는 상대방의 감정을 해치는 농담을 하지 말아야 한다.
④  ⑤ 
②  상담사는 자기 생각을 분명하게 드러낼 줄도 알아야 한다.
③  상담사는 항상 친절한 태도로 상담을 진행해야 한다.
  이제 듣기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 지시에 
④  상담사는 정기적으로 상담 기술 교육을 받아야 한다.
따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
⑤  상담사는 상담 기록을 철저히 관리해야 한다.
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
홀수형
21. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은? 23. 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
The negative effects of extrinsic motivators such as grades  When we remark with surprise that someone “looks young” 
have been documented with students from different cultures.  for his or her chronological age, we are observing that we 
Although this matter is more complex than simply regarding  all age biologically at different rates. Scientists have good 
evidence that this apparent difference is real. It is likely that age 
all extrinsic rewards as controlling or diminishing learning, 
changes begin in different parts of the body at different times 
we agree with Richard Ryan and his colleagues that people 
and that the rate of annual change varies among various cells, 
across different cultures are likely to express more satisfaction 
tissues, and organs, as well as from person to person. Unlike 
with their lives when their primary goals are intrinsic rather 
the passage of time, biological aging resists easy measurement. 
than  extrinsic.  Another  consistent  research  finding  is  that 
What  we  would  like  to  have  is  one  or  a  few  measurable 
when  a  learning  activity  is  undertaken  explicitly  to  attain 
biological changes that mirror all other biological age changes 
some extrinsic reward, people respond by seeking the least 
without reference to the passage of time, so that we could say, 
demanding way of ensuring the reward. Since there are three 
for example, that someone who is chronologically eighty years 
decades of evidence that dominating instruction with a system 
old is biologically sixty years old. This kind of measurement 
of  controlling  external  rewards  may  contribute  to  inferior  would help explain why one eighty-year-old has so many more 
learning,  using  a  pedagogy  based  on  theories  of  intrinsic  youthful qualities than does another eighty-year-old, who may 
motivation  appears  to  be  a  more  reasonable  and  effective  be biologically eighty or even ninety years old.
approach  to  enhancing  learning  among  culturally  diverse 
In Search of a Mirror Reflecting Biological Aging
① 
students.
Reasons for Slow Aging in the Modern Era 
② 
*pedagogy: 교수법 ③  A Few Tips to Guess Chronological Age
Secrets of Biological Aging Disclosed 
④ 
①  적절한 외적 보상이 삶의 만족도를 향상시킨다. 
Looking for the Fountain of Youth
⑤ 
② 학습자의 외적 동기와 내적 동기의 균형이 필요하다.
③  문화적 다양성을 고려한 교육 이론의 확립이 중요하다. 
24. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
④ 내적 동기의 교육적 기능에 대한 실질적인 연구가 시급하다.
⑤ 내적 동기 부여가 문화적 배경이 다른 학생들의 교육에 효과적이다.
22. 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Twin  sirens  hide  in  the  sea  of  history,  tempting  those 
seeking to understand and appreciate the past onto the reefs of 
misunderstanding and misinterpretation. These twin dangers 
are temporocentrism and ethnocentrism. Temporocentrism is 
the belief that your times are the best of all possible times. All 
other times are thus inferior. Ethnocentrism is the belief that 
your  culture  is  the  best  of  all  possible  cultures.  All  other 
The above graph shows the results of a survey conducted in 
cultures are thus inferior. Temporocentrism and ethnocentrism 
2012. It compares the percentage of parents of minor children 
unite  to  cause  individuals  and  cultures  to  judge  all  other 
(hereafter, parents) and that of other adults in terms of their 
individuals and cultures by the “superior” standards of their 
involvement  in  six  library  activities.  Most  notably,  the 
①
current culture. This leads to a total lack of perspective when 
percentage of parents is higher than that of other adults in all 
dealing  with  past  and/or  foreign  cultures  and  a  resultant  activity  types.  The  percentage  of  parents  who  browsed 
②
misunderstanding and misappreciation of them. Temporocentrism  shelves is the same as that of parents who borrowed print 
and ethnocentrism tempt moderns into unjustified criticisms  books.  The  percentage  gap  between  parents  and  other 
③
of the peoples of the past. adults is largest in the activity of attending classes or events 
for children and is smallest in the activity of using computers 
distinct differences in the ways of recording history
①  or the Internet.  The percentage of other adults who browsed 
④
universal features discovered in different cultures
②  shelves is twice as high as that of other adults who borrowed 
historians’ efforts to advocate their own culture
③  DVDs,  CDs,  or  videotapes.  Finally,  the  percentage  of 
⑤
④  pros and cons of two cross-cultural perspectives parents who borrowed e-books is less than 10% but is higher 
beliefs that cause biased interpretations of the past than that of other adults who did the same activity.
⑤ 
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
홀수형
25. Protogenes에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. Virginia Art Show 2015에  관한  다음  안내문의  내용과 
Known for his devotion to each of his paintings, Protogenes  일치하지 않는  것은?
was an ancient Greek painter and a rival of Apelles. He was 
born in Caunus, on the coast of Caria, but lived most of his 
Virginia Art Show 2015
life in Rhodes. Little else is known of him. But there are 
We invite you to join us at the 20th Virginia Art Show, 
some accounts of his paintings. The Ialysus and the Satyr 
famed all along the east coast for the variety and quality 
were the most well-known among his works. Protogenes spent 
of its exhibits. Works by famous artists such as Mabel 
approximately seven years painting the Ialysus, a depiction of a 
Green, Theresa Peterson, and Ronald McKuen will be 
local hero of a town in Rhodes. After remaining in Rhodes for 
displayed. The Virginia Philharmonic will perform on 
at least 200 years, it was carried off to Rome. There later it 
the first day of the show.
was destroyed by fire. Protogenes worked on the Satyr during 
Come and enjoy the fabulous drawings, sculptures, 
Demetrius Poliorcetes’ attack on Rhodes from 305 to304 B.C. 
photographs, digital works, and the great music!
Interestingly, the garden in which he painted the Satyr was in 
the middle of the enemy’s camp. Protogenes is said to have been  Dates: November 1 30
∙ －
about seventy years of age when the Satyr was completed. Hours: 10:00 a.m. 9:00 p.m.
∙ －
Place: Westchester Art Center
∙
①  고대 그리스 화가였다.
Entrance Fees:
Rhodes ∙
②  일생의 대부분을  에서 지냈다.
- Adults: $15 one day
Ialysus 7
③  를 그리는 데 대략  년을 보냈다.   
- Children: $7 one day
Satyr
④  적진과 멀리 떨어진 곳에서  를 그렸다.   
   Free admission for Virginia residents
Satyr 70
⑤  를 완성했을 때는 약  세였다고 전해진다.
For further information, please visit our website at 
26. 2015 Annual Teen Programmers Conference에 관한 다음  www.virginiaartshow.org.
안내문의 내용과 일치하는 것은? 
①  스무 번째 개최되는 행사이다. 
2015 Annual Teen Programmers Conference 
②  유명한 예술가의 작품이 전시된다.
November 21 & 22, 10:00 a.m. 5:00 p.m.
－ Virginia Philharmonic
③  행사 첫날  의 공연이 있다.
Hosted by the Teen Programmers Association
 
④  두 달 동안 열린다.
Is the computer screen your universe? Then join our  Virginia
⑤    주민의 무료입장이 가능하다.
conference  held  at  West  State  University’s  Brilliance 
Hall, and challenge yourself! Here you’ll meet the leaders 
in modern computer science.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점]
The conference includes: 
The Greeks’ focus on the salient object and its attributes led 
Lectures  by  renowned  industry  figures,  including 
∙
to  their  failure  to  understand  the  fundamental  nature  of 
①
Warwick Meade
causality. Aristotle explained that a stone falling through the 
10 separate seminars on hardware/software, programming, 
∙
air is due to the stone having the property of “gravity.” But of 
and new applications
course a piece of wood tossed into water floats instead of 
Exhibitions of their latest products by 12 major firms  ②
∙
sinking. This phenomenon Aristotle explained as being due 
Ticket Prices:
to the wood having the property of “levity”! In both cases 
Total Pass: $25 (includes buffet lunch) 
∙ the focus is exclusively on the object, with no attention 
③
Lectures&Seminars Only: $15
∙ paid  to  the  possibility  that  some  force  outside  the  object 
Exhibitions Only: $10 
∙ might be relevant. But the Chinese saw the world as consisting 
Booking  is  essential.  Reserve  your  tickets  at  of continuously interacting substances, so their attempts to 
www.tiinprogrammers.org. understand  it  causing them  to  be  oriented  toward  the 
④
complexities  of  the  entire  “field,”  that  is,  the  context  or 
environment  as  a  whole.  The  notion that  events  always 
3 ⑤
①  일간 진행된다.
occur  in  a  field  of  forces  would  have  been  completely 
②  시청의 대강당에서 개최된다.         
intuitive to the Chinese.
12
③  개의 개별 세미나가 열린다.
④  Total Pass에  점심 뷔페가 포함된다. *salient: 현저한, 두드러진
levity: 
⑤  예약하지 않아도 참가할 수 있다. ** 가벼움
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
홀수형
(A) (B) (C)
29. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  [31～34] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은? 31. When  two  cultures  come  into  contact,  they  do  not 
The Atitlán Giant Grebe was a large, flightless bird that had  exchange  every  cultural  item.  If  that  were  the  case,  there 
evolved  from  the  much  more  widespread  and  smaller  would be no cultural differences in the world today. Instead, 
Pied-billed Grebe. By 1965 there were only around 80 birds  only a small number of cultural elements ever spread from 
left on Lake Atitlán. One immediate reason was easy enough  one  culture  to  another.  Which  cultural  item  is  accepted 
to spot: the local human population was cutting down the reed  depends  largely  on  the  item’s  use  and  compatibility  with 
beds at a furious rate. This (A) accommodation/destruction  already existing cultural traits. For example, it is not likely 
was  driven  by  the  needs  of  a  fast  growing  mat-making  that men’s hair dyes designed to “get out the gray” will spread 
industry. But there were other problems. An American airline  into parts of rural Africa where a person’s status is elevated 
was intent on developing the lake as a tourist destination for  with  advancing  years.  Even  when  a(n) is 
   
fishermen.  However,  there  was  a  major  problem  with  this  consistent with a society’s needs, there is still no guarantee 
idea:  the  lake  (B) lacked/supported  any  suitable  sporting  that  it  will  be  accepted.  For  example,  most  people  in  the 
fish! To compensate for this rather obvious defect, a specially  United States using US customary units (e.g., inch, foot, yard, 
selected species of fish called the Large-mouthed Bass was  mile,  etc.)  have  resisted  adopting  the  metric  system  even 
introduced.  The  introduced  individuals  immediately  turned  though making such a change would enable US citizens to 
their attentions to the crabs and small fish that lived in the lake,  interface with the rest of the world more efficiently. 
[3점]
thus  (C) competing/cooperating  with  the  few  remaining 
metric system: 
* 미터법
grebes for food. There is also little doubt that they sometimes 
gobbled up the zebra-striped Atitlán Giant Grebe’s chicks. ①  categorization ②  innovation 
investigation observation
③  ④ 
reed: 
* 갈대
specification
**gobble up: 게걸스럽게 먹다 ⑤ 
(A) (B) (C)
accommodation lacked competing
① …… ……
accommodation supported cooperating
② …… ……
destruction lacked competing
③ …… ……
destruction supported cooperating
④ …… ……
destruction lacked cooperating
⑤ …… …… 32. Some distinctions between good and bad are hardwired into 
our biology. Infants enter the world ready to respond to pain as 
bad and to sweet (up to a point) as good. In many situations, 
however, the boundary between good and bad is a reference 
he[his]
30. 밑줄 친  가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
point that changes over time and depends on the immediate 
The dancers stood on a two-step elevated stage, so that there 
circumstances. Imagine that you are out in the country on a cold 
was a natural gap between those who came to dance and those 
night, inadequately dressed for the pouring rain, your clothes 
who came to watch. The host randomly pulled the name of a 
soaked. A stinging cold wind completes your misery. As you 
well-known  dancer,  Linx,  out  of  a  hat.  People  cheered. 
wander around, you find a large rock that provides some shelter 
According to the format, Linx had to “call out” another dancer 
from the fury of the elements. The biologist Michel Cabanac 
to  battle  him  on  stage.  Instead  of  deliberately  choosing 
would call the experience of that moment intensely pleasurable 
someone,  however, he  decided  to  select  his  opponent 
① because it functions, as pleasure normally does, to indicate the 
randomly by making himself into a human spin-wheel. He 
direction of 
. 
propelled himself into a backspin, covered his eyes, and 
② The pleasant relief will not last very long, of course, and you 
extended  his  arm  above  his  head.  When  his  body  finally 
will soon be shivering behind the rock again, driven by your 
stopped spinning, his arm pointed away from the dancers 
③ renewed suffering to seek better shelter. 
[3점]
on  stage  and  directly  at  Dan  Tres,  standing  among  the 
spectators.  The  crowd  erupted  in  “Ohhhhs!”  because he  *shiver: 떨다
④
was an older family man who had not danced hip-hop in many 
a permanent emotional adjustment to circumstantial demands
①
years, while the much younger Linx was a nimble b-boy. Linx 
enhancing self-consciousness through physical suffering
②
looked  embarrassed,  but  nonetheless he  called  out  the 
⑤ a biologically significant improvement of circumstances
③
respected elder to battle.
judging desirable and undesirable conditions impartially
④
*nimble: 동작이 날렵한 ⑤ a mentally pre-determined inclination for emotional stability
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
홀수형
33. Research and development for seed improvement has long  [35～36] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
been  a  public  domain  and  government  activity  for  the  것을 고르시오.
common good. However, private capital started to flow into 
35.
seed production and took it over as a sector of the economy, 
creating  an  artificial  split  between  the  two  aspects  of  the  Some people make few intentional changes in life. Sure, 
over time they may get fatter, gather lines, and go gray. 
seed’s nature: its role as means of production and its role as 
product.  This  process  gained  pace  after  the  invention  of 
(A) They train for marathons, quit smoking, switch fields, 
hybrid breeding of maize in the late 1920s. Today most maize 
write plays, take up the guitar, or learn to tango even if 
seed cultivated are hybrids. The companies that sell them are 
they  never  danced  before  in  their  lives.  What  is  the 
able to keep the distinct parent lines from farmers, and the 
difference between these two groups of people? 
grain  that  they  produce  is  not  suited  for  seed  saving  and 
(B) But they wear their hair the same way, buy the same 
replanting.  The  combination  guarantees  that  farmers  will 
brand  of  shoes,  eat  the  same  breakfast,  and  stick  to 
have to                                                                          . In the 
routines  for  no  reason  other  than  the  ease  of  a 
1990s the extension of patent laws as the only intellectual 
comfortable, predictable life. Yet as both research and 
property rights tool into the area of seed varieties started to 
real life show, many others do make important changes.
create a growing market for private seed companies. 
[3점]
(C) It’s their perspective. People who change do not question 
*maize: 옥수수 whether  change  is  possible  or  look  for  reasons  they 
buy more seed from the company each season cannot  change.  They  simply  decide  on  a  change  they 
① 
use more chemical fertilizer than before want  and  do  what  is  necessary  to  accomplish  it. 
② 
pioneer markets for their food products Changing,  which  always  stems  from  a  firm  decision, 
③ 
becomes job number one.
increase the efficiency of food production
④ 
⑤  search for ways to maintain rural communities ① (A)－(C)－(B) ② (B)－(A)－(C)
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
③ － － ④ － －
(C) (B) (A)
⑤ － －
36.
34. Long before Walt Whitman wrote Leaves of Grass, poets had 
addressed themselves to fame. Horace, Petrarch, Shakespeare,  Sometimes, after punishment has been administered a 
Milton, and Keats all hoped that poetic greatness would grant  few times, it needn’t be continued, because the mere threat 
them a kind of earthly immortality. Whitman held a similar  of punishment is enough to induce the desired behavior. 
faith that for centuries the world would value his poems. But 
(A) Avoidance training, however, doesn’t always work in our 
to this ancient desire to live forever on the page, he added a 
favor.  For  instance,  a  child  who  has  been  repeatedly 
new sense of fame. Readers would not simply attend to the 
criticized for poor performance on math may learn to 
poet’s work; they would be attracted to the greatness of his 
dodge difficult math problems in order to avoid further 
personality. They would see in his poems a vibrant cultural 
punishment.
performance,  an  individual  springing  from  the  book  with 
(B) Unfortunately, because of this avoidance, the child fails 
tremendous charisma and appeal. Out of the political rallies 
to  develop  his  math  skills  and  therefore  improve  the 
and electoral parades that marked Jacksonian America, Whitman 
capabilities he has, and so a vicious cycle has set in. 
defined  poetic  fame  in  relation  to  the  crowd.  Other  poets 
The avoidance must be unlearned through some positive 
might look for their inspiration from the goddess of poetry. 
experiences with math in order for this cycle to be broken.
Whitman’s poet sought   
.
In  the  instability  of  American  democracy,  fame  would  be  (C) Psychologists  call  this  avoidance  training  because  the 
person is learning to avoid the possibility of a punishing 
dependent on celebrity, on the degree to which the people 
consequence. Avoidance training is responsible for many 
rejoiced in the poet and his work. 
[3점]
everyday  behaviors.  It  has  taught  you  to  carry  an 
rally: 
* 집회 umbrella when it looks like rain to avoid the punishment 
a refuge from public attention of getting wet, and to keep your hand away from a hot 
① 
poetic purity out of political chaos iron to avoid the punishment of a burn.
② 
immortality in literature itself 
③  ① (A)－(C)－(B) ② (B)－(A)－(C)
④  the approval of his contemporaries ③ (B)－(C)－(A) ④ (C)－(A)－(B)
fame with political celebrities (C) (B) (A)
⑤  ⑤ － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
홀수형
[37～38] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장  39. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
적절한 곳을 고르시오.
Food  intake  is  essential  for  the  survival  of  every  living 
37.   organism. The failure to detect spoiled or toxic food can 
have deadly consequences. Therefore, it is not surprising that 
Surprised by the vision of an unfamiliar silhouette pushing 
humans use all their five senses to analyze food quality.  A 
①
into the house, these dogs were using their eyes instead of 
first judgment about the value of a food source is made on 
their noses. 
its  appearance  and  smell.  Food  that  looks  and  smells 
②
attractive is taken into the mouth.  The value of a particular 
Remember  when  you  were  little  and  you  imagined  that  ③
food is an estimation of how good it is, based on its level of 
adults had infinite power? Surely someone who could drive 
vitamins, minerals, or calories.  Here, based on a complex 
the car, open the juice container, and reach the sink could  ④
sensory analysis that is not only restricted to the sense of taste 
make it stop raining. ( ) I think that’s the same expectation 
①
but also includes smell, touch, and hearing, the final decision 
that we have with respect to our dogs and their ability to 
whether to swallow or reject food is made.  Frequently, 
smell. ( ) Because they are so good at using their noses,  ⑤
②
this  complex  interaction  between  different  senses  is 
we assume that they can smell anything, anytime. ( ) But 
③
inappropriately  referred  to  as  ‘taste’  although  it  should  be 
dogs use other senses, too, and the brains of both humans 
better  called  flavor  perception,  because  it  uses  multiple 
and dogs tend to intensify one sense at a time. ( ) Many 
④
senses.
owners  have  been  snapped  at  by  their  dogs  when  they 
returned home with a new hairdo or a new coat. ( ) Their 
⑤
noses may be remarkable, but they’re not always switched on. 
(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Performance must be judged in terms of what is under 
the control of the individuals being evaluated rather than 
those  influences  on  performance  that  are  beyond  their 
control. There can be broad, influential factors, sometimes 
of an economic nature, that hold down the performance 
of everyone being judged. One example is in sales. If there 
is a general downturn in the economy and products or 
38.   services are not being purchased with the same frequency 
as in the previous year, sales could be down, for example, 
Even so, it is not the money per se that is valuable, but the 
by an average of 15%. This 15% (actually  15%) figure 
－
fact that it can potentially yield more positive experiences.
would then represent “average” performance. Perhaps the 
best salesperson in the year had only a 3% drop in sales 
Money beyond the bare minimum necessary for food and 
―
over the previous year. Thus, “good” performance in this 
shelter is nothing more than a means to an end. Yet so 
―
situation is a smaller loss compared to some average or 
often we confuse means with ends, and sacrifice happiness 
norm group.
(end) for money (means). It is easy to do this when material 
󰀻
wealth is elevated to the position of the ultimate end, as it so 
often  is  in  our  society.  ( )  This  is  not  to  say  that  the 
① In performance evaluation, we should consider  (A)  
accumulation and production of material wealth is in itself 
factors affecting the individual’s performance rather than 
wrong. ( ) Material prosperity can help individuals, as well 
② (B)  figures only.
as society, attain higher levels of happiness. ( ) Financial 
③
security can liberate us from work we do not find meaningful 
(A) (B)
and from having to worry about the next paycheck. ( ) 
④ contextual put aside
① ……
Moreover, the desire to make money can challenge and inspire 
contextual rely on
② ……
us. ( ) Material wealth in and of itself does not necessarily 
⑤ controllable put aside
③ ……
generate meaning or lead to emotional wealth. 
[3점] positive ignore
④ ……
per se:  positive rely on
* 그 자체로 ⑤ ……
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
홀수형
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
“Hannah,  you  look  so  serious.  What  are  you  thinking 
We might describe science that has no known practical 
about?” “Oh, Mom, just, you know.” Her mother smiled. 
value as basic science or basic research. Our exploration of 
“You’ll  miss  this  place,  won’t  you?”  Hannah  nodded. 
worlds such as Jupiter would be called basic science, and it is 
“Quick,” her mother said, “stand over there... and smile, 
easy to argue that basic science is not worth the effort and 
Hannah. You have such a pretty smile.” (b)She hurried out 
expense because it has no known practical use. Of course, the 
her  cell  phone,  zoomed  in  on  her  daughter,  and  realized 
problem is that we have no way of knowing what knowledge 
suddenly that she was looking at a young lady. “You’re all 
will be of use until we acquire that knowledge. In the middle 
grown-up,” she whispered. Hannah took more photos with 
of the 19th century, Queen Victoria is supposed to have asked 
her  teachers  in  the  school  garden.  She  wished  all  the 
physicist Michael Faraday what good his experiments with 
memories would remain in her mind forever.
electricity and magnetism were. He answered, “Madam, what 
good is a baby?” Of course, Faraday’s experiments were the  (C)
beginning of the electronic age. Many of the practical uses 
Hannah struggled with the many class hours, the endless 
of  scientific  knowledge  that  fill  our  world transistors, 
― assignments, and the exams. However, there were exciting 
vaccines, plastics began as basic research. Basic scientific 
― events like sports days and school festivals. How could (c)she 
research  provides  the  raw  materials  that  technology  and  ever forget her second year! She had sung and danced with 
engineering use to solve problems.  her friends in the festival, part of a sensational performance. 
Basic scientific research has yet one more important use  After that, she had become more confident and active. Her 
that is so valuable it seems an insult to refer to it as merely  thoughts  wandering,  Hannah  vaguely  heard  her  mother’s 
functional. Science is the study of nature, and as we learn  voice. “Here you are!” Her mother hurried over, and gave 
more about how nature works, we learn more about what our  (d)her a bundle of lilies and roses and a big hug.   
existence  in  this  universe  means  for  us.  The  seemingly 
(D)
 knowledge we gain from space probes to other 
worlds tells us about our planet and our own role in the  That day was unusually foggy as if something mysterious 
scheme of nature. Science tells us where we are and what we  were ahead. Hannah was nervous and trembling. The principal 
are, and that knowledge is beyond value.  was energetically addressing them, talking of the challenges 
and thrills of high school life, but she could not concentrate. 
*space probe: 우주탐사기(機) 
Later, a tall, strict-looking man introduced himself as (e)her 
homeroom  teacher.  The  classroom  was  old,  but  neat  and 
41. 윗글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
inviting. Hannah was seated in the fifth row, hallway side, 
What Does Basic Science Bring to Us? 
①  even though she had wanted a window seat. High school life 
The Crisis of Researchers in Basic Science soon proved as challenging as the principal had predicted.
② 
Common Goals of Science and Technology
③ 
④  Technology: The Ultimate Aim of Basic Science 43. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Michael Faraday, Frontiersman of the Electronic Age!
⑤  가장 적절한 것은?
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
① － － ② － －
42. 윗글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점] (C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
③ － － ④ － －
applicable impractical inaccurate (D) (C) (B)
①  ②  ③  ⑤ － －
priceless resourceful
④  ⑤ 
(a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ∼   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
(A)
Hannah
45. 윗글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
The midday sun was glorious. The high school grounds 
were filled with well-dressed people, posing in fancy dresses  ①  다른 신입생들과 함께 운동장에 서 있었다. 
and suits for cheerful photographers. Congratulations, hugs,  ②  학교 정원에서 선생님들과 사진을 찍었다.
③  축제에서 노래를 부르고 춤을 추었다.
and  laughter  were  contagious.  Hannah  looked  at  all  the 
④  교장 선생님의 말씀에 집중할 수가 없었다.   
familiar faces that had been part of (a)her life for the last 
⑤  교실에서 다섯 번째 줄 창가 자리에 앉았다.
few  years.  Soon  her  mother  would  be  joining  them.  She 
recalled the first day of school when she had stood in that  *  확인 사항
same place, in the middle of many anxious freshmen, some 
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
of whom had become her closest friends.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
제 3 교시
홀수형
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sorry. I already ate dinner.
① 
No. I’ve never met him before.
② 
Sure. Thanks for the invitation.
③ 
Yes. I bought a box of chocolates.
④ 
Good. I hate working on weekends.
⑤ 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
No problem. I’ll pick up your daughter. 고르시오.
① 
You’re welcome. It’s my pleasure.  to remove election posters
②  ① 
Wow, this winter is really cold. to take the adviser position
③  ② 
I agree. The timing isn’t good. to cancel the student meeting
④  ③ 
Okay, let me take a look. to speak out against school violence
⑤  ④ 
to register as a presidential candidate
⑤ 
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 야구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는  이유를 고르시오.
고르시오.
①  독감에 걸려서
①  교복 물려주기를 권장하려고 ②  비행기를 놓쳐서
②  기부 행사 참여를 독려하려고 ③  동생을 돌봐야 해서
③  생활 용품 절약을 장려하려고 ④  회의에 참석해야 해서
④  학교 식당 공사를 안내하려고 ⑤  입장권을 구할 수 없어서
⑤  학부모 간담회 일정을 공지하려고
9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$9 $16 $18 $20 $27
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오. 10. 대화를 듣고,  미용실에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은  것을 
①  수면 문제를 해결하는 방법 고르시오.
②  휴대전화와 업무 효율성의 관계
①  가게 이름 ②  위치 ③  남자 이발 비용
③  미디어 기기가 학습에 미치는 영향
④  영업시간 ⑤  미용사 이름
④  규칙적인 운동의 중요성
⑤  충분한 낮잠의 필요성 science essay contest
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
않는  것을 고르시오.
①  고등학생이 참가할 수 있다.
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
②  에세이 주제가 두 가지이다.
①  연출가－배우 ②  작곡가－가수 ③  에세이 분량에 제한이 있다.
③  사회자－요리사 ④  식당 지배인－고객 ④  온라인으로만 에세이 제출을 허용한다.
⑤  농장 주인－도매업자 ⑤  참가자 전원에게 후원 기관 견학 기회를 준다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
홀수형
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택할 패키지  18. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
상품을 고르시오. One difference between winners and losers is how they handle 
Attraction Packages at Grandlife Amusement Park losing. Even for the best companies and most accomplished 
professionals, long track records of success are punctuated by 
slips, slides, and mini-turnarounds. Even the team that wins 
①
  the game might make mistakes and lag behind for part of it. 
②
③ That’s  why  the  ability  to  recover  quickly  is  so  important. 
④
Troubles are ubiquitous. Surprises can fall from the sky like 
⑤
volcanic ash and appear to change everything. That’s why one 
prominent scholar said, “Anything can look like a failure in 
13. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
the  middle.”  Thus,  a  key  factor  in  high  achievement  is 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
bouncing back from the low points.
Man:
Set a time limit when making a presentation. ① 경영의 전문화는 일류 기업의 조건이다.
① 
The more knowledge, the better the interview. ② 위기 관리에는 전문가의 조언이 필요하다.
② 
The company buys your creativity, not your image. ③ 합리적 소비는 필요와 욕구의 구분에서 비롯된다.
③ 
Interviewing is no more than expressing yourself. ④ 폭넓은 인간 관계는 성공의 필수 요소이다.
④ 
⑤ 실패를 빨리 극복하는 것이 성공의 열쇠이다.
Too much confidence in your vision doesn’t help.
⑤ 
I
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘ ’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
As I walked to the train station, I felt the warm sun on my 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
back. I caught my train on time. It arrived at my destination ten 
Woman:
minutes early, which was perfect, as I was due to present my 
I’ll write it down for you then.
① 
new idea to the company at 10 a.m. The presentation went better 
You should share it with others.
② 
than expected, and my manager seemed particularly pleased. 
You prepared a lot for the event.
③ 
Later that day, my manager called me into her office. She smiled 
I can memorize your phone number.
④ 
at me and said, “James, you’ve been with us for six years now. 
Let’s go to the history museum now.
⑤ 
How would you feel if I were to offer you the Sales Director 
position in London?” Sales Director in London! Wow! This was 
Peter Sandra
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장 
a dream come true for me. I couldn’t believe what I had just heard!
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
Peter: Sandra,  joyful jealous outraged
①  ②  ③ 
①  I think you need to take a break for a while. ④  confused ⑤  indifferent
I recommend you return your book soon.
② 
I’d suggest changing where you study.
③  [20～21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
you’d better review what you learned.
④  20. Many disciplines are better learned by entering into the 
you should’ve slept more last night.
⑤ 
doing than by mere abstract study. This is often the case with 
the  most  abstract  as  well  as  the  seemingly  more  practical 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
disciplines. For example, within the philosophical disciplines, 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? logic must be learned through the use of examples and actual 
①  consequences of communication problems problem solving. Only after some time and struggle does the 
②  difficulties of managing a relationship student begin to develop the insights and intuitions that enable 
③  various merits of having hobbies him  to  see  the  centrality  and  relevance  of  this  mode  of 
causes of conflict within a family
④  thinking. This learning by doing is essential in many of the 
ways of making peace with family members
⑤  sciences. For instance, only after a good deal of observation do 
the sparks in the bubble chamber become recognizable as the 
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌  것은? specific movements of identifiable particles.
a letter a picture cookies
①  ②  ③  history of science education
① 
earrings flowers
④  ⑤  limitations of learning strategies
② 
importance of learning by doing
③ 
  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의  effects of intuition on scientific discoveries
④ 
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다. difference between philosophy and science
⑤ 
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
홀수형
21. The  most  normal  and  competent  child  encounters  what  23. The key to successful risk taking is to understand that the 
seem like insurmountable problems in living. But by playing  actions you’re taking should be the natural next step. One of 
them  out,  he  may  become  able  to  cope  with  them  in  a  the mistakes we often make when confronting a risk situation 
step-by-step process. He often does so in symbolic ways that  is our tendency to focus on the end result. Skiers who are 
are hard for even him to understand, as he is reacting to inner  unsure of themselves often do this. They’ll go to the edge of a 
processes  whose  origin  may  be  buried  deep  in  his  difficult  slope,  look  all  the  way  down  to  the  bottom,  and 
unconscious. This may result in play that makes little sense to  determine that the slope is too steep for them to try. The ones 
us  at  the  moment,  since  we  do  not  know  the  purposes  it  that decide to make it change their focus by analyzing what 
serves. When there is no immediate danger, it is usually best  they need to do to master the first step, like getting through 
to approve of the child’s play without interfering. Efforts to  the  first  mogul  on  the  hill.  Once  they  get  there,  they 
assist him in his struggles, while well intentioned, may divert  concentrate on the next mogul, and over the course of the run, 
him from seeking and eventually finding the solution that will  they end up at the bottom of what others thought was an 
serve him best. impossible mountain.
①  dangers of playing violent games to mental health *mogul: 모굴(스키의 활주 사면에 있는 단단한 눈 더미)
beneficial influence of playing outdoors in childhood 
②  Separating the Possible from the Impossible
① 
children’s play as problem solving with minimal intervention 
③ Focus on the Next Step, Not the Final Result
② 
necessity of intervening in disputes between siblings
④  Start with Ultimate Goals in Mind!
③ 
parental roles in children’s physical development
⑤  The Wonders of Committed Efforts
④ 
Success Through Risk Avoidance
⑤ 
[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Georg Dionysius Ehret
22. At some time in their lives, most people pause to reflect on  24. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 
their own moral principles and on the practical implications of  않는  것은?
those  principles,  and  they  sometimes  think  about  what  The  18th  century  is  called  the  Golden  Age  of  botanical 
principles people should have or which moral standards can  painting, and Georg Dionysius Ehret is often praised as the 
be best justified. When a person accepts a moral principle,  greatest  botanical  artist  of  the  time.  Born  in  Heidelberg, 
naturally the person believes the principle is important and  Germany, he was the son of a gardener who taught him much 
well justified. But there is more to moral principles than that.  about art and nature. As a young man, Ehret traveled around 
When a principle is part of a person’s moral code, that person  Europe, largely on foot, observing plants and developing his 
is  strongly  motivated  toward  the  conduct  required  by  the  artistic  skills.  In  Holland,  he  became  acquainted  with  the 
principle,  and  against  behavior  that  conflicts  with  that  Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus. Through his collaborations with 
principle. The person will tend to feel guilty when his or her  Linnaeus and others, Ehret provided illustrations for a number 
own  conduct  violates  that  principle  and  to  disapprove  of  of significant horticultural publications. Ehret’s reputation for 
others whose behavior conflicts with it. Likewise, the person  scientific accuracy gained him many commissions from wealthy 
will tend to hold in esteem those whose conduct shows an  patrons, particularly in England, where he eventually settled.
abundance of the motivation required by the principle.
*horticultural: 원예(학)의
Feeling Guilty? Check Your Self-Esteem First
①  18
①  세기의 가장 위대한 식물 화가로서 칭송받는다.
Do Not Let Your Moral Principles Change!
② 
②  정원사의 아들이었다.
Moral Integrity: A Principle of Philosophy
③  ③  젊은 시절 주로 마차로 유럽을 여행하였다. 
How Do People Form Their Personalities?
④  ④ 다수의 원예 출판물에 삽화를 제공하였다.
Moral Principles: Guiding Our Conduct
⑤  ⑤  영국에 정착하였다.
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
홀수형
After-School Program
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
않는  것은?
AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM 
December 1, 2014 January 30, 2015
－
                    Are you looking for fun and exciting classes?
Come on down to the Green Hills Community Center to 
check out our FREE program for local teens!
Classes
Art, Music, Taekwondo
∙
Classes with fewer than 20 applicants will be canceled.
∙
The above graph shows the percentages of Americans aged  Time & Place
12-17 who posted certain types of personal information on  The program will run from Monday to Friday
∙
social media sites in 2006 and in 2012. The year 2012 saw  (5:00 pm to 7:00 pm).
①
an  overall  percentage  increase  in  each  category  of  posted  All classes will take place in the Simpson Building.
∙
personal information. In both years, the percentage of the 
② How to sign up
young Americans who posted photos of themselves was the 
Registration forms must be sent by email to the address 
∙
highest of all the categories. In 2006, the percentage of 
③ below by 6:00 pm, November 28. Please download the 
those who posted city or town names was higher than that of 
forms from our website at www.greenhills.org.
those who posted school names. Regarding posted email 
④  For additional information, please visit our website
addresses, the percentage of 2012 was three times higher than 
or send an email to bill@greenhills.org.
that of 2006. Compared to 2006, 2012 recorded an eighteen 
⑤
percent increase in the category of cell phone numbers.
①  지역의 십 대들을 위한 무료 프로그램이다.
20
②  신청자가  명 미만인 수업은 취소된다.
Simpson Building
③  모든 수업은  에서 진행된다.
Short Film Festival ④  등록 신청서는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
26. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는  것은?
⑤  추가 정보는 웹사이트나 이메일을 이용하면 된다.
SHORT FILM FESTIVAL
We will be hosting nine short films, which were written, 
directed, acted and produced by students from the College 
of Performing Arts & Film, Pamil University.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점]
Date: Friday, November 21, 2014
∙
During the early stages when the aquaculture industry was 
Time: 7:00 pm 10:00 pm
∙ －
rapidly expanding, mistakes were made and these were costly 
Place: Pamil Auditorium, Pamil University
∙
both in terms of direct losses and in respect of the industry’s 
Price:
∙
image.  High-density  rearing  led  to  outbreaks  of  infectious 
$10(general admission)
diseases that in some cases  devastated not just the caged 
$5 (discount for all university students with a valid ID) ①
fish, but local wild fish populations too. The negative impact 
- Tickets can be purchased from the student union
on local wildlife inhabiting areas  close to the fish farms 
office from Monday, November 17, 2014. ②
continues to be an ongoing public relations problem for the 
- All tickets are non-refundable.
industry.  Furthermore,  a  general  lack  of  knowledge  and 
- FREE beverage included in ticket price
insufficient care being taken when fish pens were initially 
For more information, please call the student union
∙
constructed  meaning that pollution from excess feed and 
office at (343) 777-8338. ③
fish waste created huge barren underwater deserts. These were 
costly  lessons  to  learn,  but  now  stricter  regulations  are  in 
①  교수들이 제작한 영화가 상영된다.
②  오전에 세 시간 동안 진행된다. place to ensure that fish pens are placed in sites ④where there 
③  영화 전공 학생에게만 입장료를 할인해 준다.  is good water flow to remove fish waste. This, in addition to 
④  입장권은 환불이 가능하다. other methods that decrease the overall amount of uneaten 
⑤  무료 음료가 입장료에 포함된다. food,  has helped aquaculture to clean up its act.
⑤
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
홀수형
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? [31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Nancy was struggling to see the positive when ①her teen  31. The concept of humans doing multiple things at a time has 
daughter was experiencing a negative perspective on her life  been studied by psychologists since the 1920s, but the term 
and abilities. In her desire to parent intentionally,  she went  “multitasking”  didn’t  exist  until  the  1960s.  It  was  used  to 
②
into her daughter’s room and noted one positive accomplishment  describe computers, not people. Back then, ten megahertz was 
she had observed. “I know you’ve been having a hard time  so fast that a new word was needed to describe a computer’s 
lately, and you aren’t feeling really good or positive about  ability  to  quickly  perform  many  tasks.  In  retrospect,  they 
your life. But you did a great job cleaning up your room  probably made a poor choice, for the expression “multitasking” 
today, and  I know that must have been a big effort for you.”  is inherently deceptive. Multitasking is about multiple tasks 
③
The  next  day,  to  Nancy’s  surprise,  the  teen  girl  seemed  alternately sharing one resource (the CPU), but in time the 
somewhat cheerful. In passing,  she said, “Mom, thanks for  context was flipped and it became interpreted to mean multiple 
④
saying the positive thing about me yesterday. I was feeling so  tasks being done simultaneously by one resource (a person). It 
down and couldn’t think of anything good about myself. After  was  a  clever  turn  of  phrase  that’s  misleading,  for  even 
you said that positive thing, it helped me see one good  computers can process only one piece of code at a time. When 
⑤
quality in myself, and I’ve been holding onto those words.” they “multitask,” they switch back and forth, alternating their 
attention  until  both  tasks  are  done.  The  speed  with  which 
computers tackle multiple tasks that 
everything happens at the same time, so comparing computers 
to humans can be confusing.
  [3점]
expels the myth feeds the illusion
①  ② 
conceals the fact proves the hypothesis
③  ④ 
blurs the conviction
⑤ 
(A), (B), (C)
30. 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
적절한 것은?  [3점]
While the eye sees at the surface, the ear tends to penetrate 
below the surface. Joachim-Ernst Berendt points out that the ear 
is the only sense that (A) fuses/replaces an ability to measure 
with an ability to judge. We can discern different colors, but 
we can give a precise number to different sounds. Our eyes do  32. My friend was disappointed that scientific progress has not 
not let us perceive with this kind of (B) diversity/precision. An  cured the world’s ills by abolishing wars and starvation; that 
unmusical person can recognize an octave and, perhaps once  gross human inequality is still widespread; that happiness is 
instructed, a quality of tone, that is, a C or an F-sharp. Berendt  not universal. My friend made a common mistake―a basic 
points out that there are few ‘acoustical illusions’ something  misunderstanding in the nature of knowledge. Knowledge is 
―
sounding like something that in fact it is not―while there are  amoral―not immoral but morality neutral. It can be used for 
many  optical  illusions.  The  ears  do  not  lie.  The  sense  of  any purpose, but many people assume it will be used to further 
hearing gives us a remarkable connection with the invisible,  their favorite hopes for society―and this is the fundamental flaw. 
underlying order of things. Through our ears we gain access to  Knowledge of the world is one thing; its uses create a separate 
vibration, which (C) underlies/undermines everything around  issue. To be disappointed that our progress in understanding 
us. The sense of tone and music in another’s voice gives us an  has not remedied the social ills of the world is a legitimate 
enormous amount of information about that person, about her  view, but . 
stance toward life, about her intentions. To argue that knowledge is not progressing because of the 
African or Middle Eastern conflicts misses the point. There is 
acoustical: 
* 청각의 
nothing inherent in knowledge that dictates any specific social 
or moral application.
(A) (B) (C)   [3점]
① fuses …… precision …… undermines ① to confuse this with the progress of knowledge is absurd
② replaces …… diversity …… underlies ② to know the nature of knowledge is to practice its moral value
③ fuses …… diversity …… undermines ③ to remove social inequality is the inherent purpose of knowledge
replaces precision underlies
④ …… …… to accumulate knowledge is to enhance its social application
④
fuses precision underlies
⑤ …… …… to make science progress is to make it cure social ills
⑤
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
홀수형
33. According to a renowned French scholar, the growth in the  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은? 
size and complexity of human populations was the driving 
A  currently  popular  attitude  is  to  blame  technology  or 
force in the evolution of science. Early, small communities had 
technologists  for  having  brought  on  the  environmental 
to concentrate all their physical and mental effort on survival; 
problems we face today, and thus to try to slow technological 
their  thoughts  were  focused  on  food  and  religion.  As 
advance by blocking economic growth. We believe this view 
communities became larger, some people had time to reflect 
to  be  thoroughly  misguided. If  technology  produced 
①
and debate. They found that they could understand and predict 
automobiles that pollute the air, it is because pollution was not 
events better if they reduced passion and prejudice, replacing 
recognized as a problem which engineers had to consider in 
these  with  observation  and  inference.  But  while  a  large 
their designs. Solar energy can be a practical alternative 
②
population  may  have  been  necessary,  in  itself  it  was  not 
energy source for us in the foreseeable future. Obviously, 
③
sufficient for science to germinate. Some empires were big, 
technology that produces pollution is generally cheaper, but 
but the rigid social control required to hold an empire together 
now that it has been decided that cleaner cars are wanted, less 
was not beneficial to science, just as it was not beneficial to 
polluting cars will be produced; cars which scarcely pollute at 
reason.  The  early  nurturing  and  later  flowering  of  science         
all could even be made. This last option, however, would 
                                                                                  to support  ④
require  several  years  and  much  investment. Although 
original  thought  and  freewheeling  incentive.  The  rise  in  ⑤
technology  is  responsive  to  the  will  of  the  people,  it  can 
commerce and the decline of authoritarian religion allowed 
seldom respond instantaneously and is never free.
science to follow reason in seventeenth-century Europe.
  [3점]
*germinate: 싹트다, 발아하다
prompted small communities to adopt harsh social norms
①
resulted from passion and enthusiasm rather than inference
②
occurred in large communities with strict hierarchical structures
③
were solely attributed to efforts of survival in a small community [36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
④
required a large and loosely structured, competitive community 것을 고르시오.
⑤
36.
The impact of color has been studied for decades. For 
(A) (B) example, in a factory, the temperature was maintained at 
34. 다음 글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
72  and the walls were painted a cool blue-green. The 
New  media  can  be  defined  by  four  characteristics  ℉
employees complained of the cold.
simultaneously: they are media at the turn of the 20th and 21st 
centuries which are both integrated and interactive and use 
(A) The psychological effects of warm and cool hues seem to 
digital code and hypertext as technical means. It follows that 
be used effectively by the coaches of the Notre Dame 
their  most  common  alternative  names  are  multimedia, 
football team. The locker rooms used for half-time breaks 
interactive media and digital media. By using this definition, 
were  reportedly  painted  to  take  advantage  of  the 
it is easy to identify media as old or new.  (A) , 
emotional impact of certain hues.
traditional television is integrated as it contains images, sound 
(B) The home-team room was painted a bright red, which 
and text, but it is not interactive or based on digital code. The 
kept  team  members  excited  or  even  angered.  The 
plain old telephone was interactive, but not integrated as it 
visiting-team room was painted a blue-green, which had a 
only transmitted speech and sounds and it did not work with 
calming effect on the team members. The success of this 
digital  code.  In  contrast,  the  new  medium  of  interactive 
application of color can be noted in the records set by 
television adds interactivity and digital code.  (B) , 
Notre Dame football teams.
the new generations of mobile or fixed telephony are fully 
digitalized and integrated as they add text, pictures or video  (C) The temperature was maintained at the same level, but the 
and they are connected to the Internet. walls were painted a warm coral. The employees stopped 
complaining  about  the  temperature  and  reported  they 
(A) (B)
were quite comfortable.
For example Additionally
① ……
Nevertheless In other words *hue: 색조, 색상 
② ……
Therefore Additionally (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ …… ①  － － ②  － －
For example In other words (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B) 
④ …… ③  － － ④  － －
Nevertheless Consequently (C) (B) (A)
⑤ …… ⑤  － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
홀수형
37.   39.  
Food  plays  a  large  part  in  how  much  you  enjoy  the  They  also  rated  how  generally  extroverted  those  fake 
outdoors.  The  possibilities  are  endless,  so  you  can  extroverts appeared, based on their recorded voices and 
constantly vary your diet. body language.
(A) They walk only a few miles each day and may use the  Some years ago, a psychologist named Richard Lippa called 
same  campsite  for  several  nights.  Survival  eaters  eat  a group of introverts to his lab and asked them to act like 
some dry cereal for breakfast, and are up and walking  extroverts while pretending to teach a math class. ( ) Then 
①
within minutes of waking. he and his team, with video cameras in hand, measured the 
length of their strides, the amount of eye contact they made 
(B) Wilderness dining has two extremes: gourmet eaters and 
with  their  “students,”  the  percentage  of  time  they  spent 
survival eaters. The first like to make camp at lunchtime 
talking, and the volume of their speech. ( ) Then Lippa 
so they have several hours to set up field ovens; they bake  ②
did the same thing with actual extroverts and compared the 
cakes and bread and cook multi-course dinners.
results. ( ) He found that although the latter group came 
③
(C) They walk dozens of miles every day; lunch is a series of 
across as more extroverted, some of the fake extroverts were 
cold  snacks  eaten  on  the  move.  Dinner  consists  of  a 
surprisingly  convincing. ( ) It  seems  that  most  of  us 
④
freeze-dried meal, “cooked” by pouring hot water into the 
know how to fake it to some extent. ( ) Whether or not 
⑤
package.
we’re aware that the length of our strides and the amount of 
time we spend talking and smiling mark us as introverts and 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
extroverts, we know it unconsciously.
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)   [3점]
③  － － ④  － －
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  － －
(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Plato  and  Tolstoy  both  assume  that  it  can  be  firmly 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장  established that certain works have certain effects. Plato is 
적절한 곳을 고르시오. sure that the representation of cowardly people makes us 
cowardly; the only way to prevent this effect is to suppress 
38.
such representations. Tolstoy is confident that the artist 
The researchers had made this happen by lengthening the  who sincerely expresses feelings of pride will pass those 
period of daylight to which the peach trees on whose roots  feelings on to us; we can no more escape than we could 
the insects fed were exposed.  escape an infectious disease. In fact, however, the effects 
of art are neither so certain nor so direct. People vary a 
Exactly how cicadas keep track of time has always intrigued 
great deal both in the intensity of their response to art and 
researchers, and it has always been assumed that the insects 
in the form which that response takes. Some people may 
must rely on an internal clock. Recently, however, one group 
indulge fantasies of violence by watching a film instead of 
of scientists working with the 17-year cicada in California 
working out those fantasies in real life. Others may be 
have suggested that the nymphs use an external cue and that 
disgusted by even glamorous representations of violence. 
they  can  count. ( ) For  their  experiments  they  took 
① Still  others  may  be  left  unmoved,  neither  attracted  nor 
15-year-old  nymphs  and  moved  them  to  an  experimental 
disgusted.
enclosure. ( ) These nymphs should have taken a further  󰀻
②
two years to emerge as adults, but in fact they took just one 
year. ( ) By  doing  this,  the  trees  were  “tricked”  into  Although Plato and Tolstoy claim that works of art have 
③
flowering twice during the year rather than the usual once.  a(n) (A)  impact on people’s feelings, the degrees 
(   ) Flowering in trees coincides with a peak in amino acid  and forms of people’s actual responses  (B)  greatly.
④
concentrations in the sap that the insects feed on. ( ) So it 
⑤
(A) (B) (A) (B)
seems that the cicadas keep track of time by counting the 
unavoidable differ direct converge
peaks. ① …… ② ……
temporary fluctuate unexpected converge
*nymph: 애벌레 ③ …… ④ ……
**sap: 수액 ⑤ favorable ……differ
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
홀수형
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Before  long,  the  reality  hit  Jeremy  hard.  Even  after 
Increased size affects group life in a number of ways. There 
spending  many  hours  each  day  preparing  lesson  plans,  it 
is evidence that larger groups (five or six members) are more 
became clear that his methods were not working. One of the 
productive  than  smaller  groups  (two  or  three  members). 
worst  moments  was  when  (b)he  distributed  a  math  test. 
Members of larger groups tend to offer more suggestions than 
Many students didn’t even look at the exam. They just put 
members of smaller groups, and although they seem to reach 
their  heads  on  their  desks  and  slept.  Jeremy  became  so 
less agreement, they also show less tension. These differences 
stressed that he even dreaded going into his classroom.
may  reflect  the  greater  need  of  larger  groups  to  solve 
organizational  problems.  Members  may  realize  that  their  (C)
behavior must become more goal-directed, since it is unlikely 
After  graduation,  Jeremy  joined  an  organization  that 
that they can coordinate their actions without making a special 
recruits future leaders to teach in low-income communities. 
effort to do so. Larger groups also put more pressure on their 
(c)He was assigned to a small school in a poor rural county 
members to conform. In such groups, it is harder for everyone 
in North Carolina. Later, his assistant principal took note of 
to take part equally in discussions or to have the same amount 
Jeremy’s high expectations and asked him to take over (d)his 
of influence on decisions.
math class. He took charge of about a dozen failing “special ed” 
There  is  evidence  that  groups  with  an  even  number  of 
kids, and Tisha and Kelly were among them. His idealism 
members differ from groups with an odd number of members. 
ran high, and he thought he would be able to magically fix 
The former disagree more than the latter and suffer more 
all of their problems.
deadlocks  as  a  result.  Groups  with  an  even  number  of 
members may split into halves. This is impossible in groups  (D)
with an odd number of members one side always has a 
― Jeremy knew something had to change. (e)He then thought 
numerical  advantage.  According  to  some  researchers,  the 
back to my class, remembering how negative emotions can 
number  five  has  special  significance.  Groups  of  this  size  drag you down, leaving positive emotions unnoticed. That’s 
usually the  problems  we  have  just  outlined.  when he decided to focus more on building positive attitudes 
Moreover, they are not plagued by the fragility and tensions  within the classroom. He borrowed lessons from my positive 
found in groups of two or three. Groups of five rate high in  psychology class and even mentioned my name to his students. 
member satisfaction; because of the odd number of members,  As  the  students’  attitudes  became  more  optimistic,  their 
deadlocks are unlikely when disagreements occur. confidence with math grew too. At the end of the school year, 
80 percent of Jeremy’s students passed the state’s math test.
 
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A)
Why the Number of Group Members Counts 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
① 
가장 적절한 것은?
Individuality vs. Collectivity in the Workplace 
② 
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
③  Equal Opportunities: Toward Maximum Satisfaction ①  － － ②  － －
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
How to Cope with Conflicts in Groups ③  － － ④  － －
④ 
Agreement on Group Size Pays Off! ⑤  (D)－(C)－(B)
⑤ 
(a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
probe escape mirror ①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
①  ②  ③ 
trigger escalate
④  ⑤ 
Jeremy
45. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. ① 대학에서 긍정 심리학을 수강했다.
② 많은 시간을 들여 수업 계획서를 준비했다.
(A)
③ 스트레스로 인해 교실에 들어가기를 두려워했다.
In my office, I have a framed letterfrom a couple of children 
④ 저소득 지역에서 가르칠 미래 지도자를 모집하는 단체에 가입했다.
I have never met. The letter holds a special significance for me.  80
⑤ 학년말에 그의 학생의  퍼센트가 수학 시험에 불합격했다.
It reads, “Dear Dr. Brown, thanks for teaching Mr. Wills to 
teach Tisha and Kelly.” Mr. Wills is Jeremy Wills, and (a)he is 
*  확인 사항
one of my former students. A few years back, he took my 
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
positive psychology class in college.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2015학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
제 3 교시
홀수형
6. 대화를 듣고,  그림에서 대화의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 
  1번부터  17번까지는  듣고  답하는  문제입니다.  1번부터 
고르시오.
15번까지는 한 번만 들려주고, 16번부터 17번까지는 두 번 
들려줍니다. 방송을 잘 듣고 답을 하시기 바랍니다.
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Sorry. I already ate dinner.
① 
No. I’ve never met him before.
② 
Sure. Thanks for the invitation.
③ 
Yes. I bought a box of chocolates.
④ 
Good. I hate working on weekends.
⑤ 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
No problem. I’ll pick up your daughter. 고르시오.
① 
You’re welcome. It’s my pleasure.  to remove election posters
②  ① 
Wow, this winter is really cold. to take the adviser position
③  ② 
I agree. The timing isn’t good. to cancel the student meeting
④  ③ 
Okay, let me take a look. to speak out against school violence
⑤  ④ 
to register as a presidential candidate
⑤ 
3. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  8. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 야구 경기를 보러 갈 수 없는  이유를 고르시오.
고르시오.
①  독감에 걸려서
①  교복 물려주기를 권장하려고 ②  비행기를 놓쳐서
②  기부 행사 참여를 독려하려고 ③  동생을 돌봐야 해서
③  생활 용품 절약을 장려하려고 ④  회의에 참석해야 해서
④  학교 식당 공사를 안내하려고 ⑤  입장권을 구할 수 없어서
⑤  학부모 간담회 일정을 공지하려고
9. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$9 $16 $18 $20 $27
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
4. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오. 10. 대화를 듣고,  미용실에 관해 두 사람이 언급하지 않은  것을 
①  수면 문제를 해결하는 방법 고르시오.
②  휴대전화와 업무 효율성의 관계
①  가게 이름 ②  위치 ③  남자 이발 비용
③  미디어 기기가 학습에 미치는 영향
④  영업시간 ⑤  미용사 이름
④  규칙적인 운동의 중요성
⑤  충분한 낮잠의 필요성 science essay contest
11. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
않는  것을 고르시오.
①  고등학생이 참가할 수 있다.
5. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
②  에세이 주제가 두 가지이다.
①  연출가－배우 ②  작곡가－가수 ③  에세이 분량에 제한이 있다.
③  사회자－요리사 ④  식당 지배인－고객 ④  온라인으로만 에세이 제출을 허용한다.
⑤  농장 주인－도매업자 ⑤  참가자 전원에게 후원 기관 견학 기회를 준다.
1
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.2
홀수형
12. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택할 패키지  18. 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것은?
상품을 고르시오. One difference between winners and losers is how they handle 
Attraction Packages at Grandlife Amusement Park losing. Even for the best companies and most accomplished 
professionals, long track records of success are punctuated by 
slips, slides, and mini-turnarounds. Even the team that wins 
①
  the game might make mistakes and lag behind for part of it. 
②
③ That’s  why  the  ability  to  recover  quickly  is  so  important. 
④
Troubles are ubiquitous. Surprises can fall from the sky like 
⑤
volcanic ash and appear to change everything. That’s why one 
prominent scholar said, “Anything can look like a failure in 
13. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
the  middle.”  Thus,  a  key  factor  in  high  achievement  is 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
bouncing back from the low points.
Man:
Set a time limit when making a presentation. ① 경영의 전문화는 일류 기업의 조건이다.
① 
The more knowledge, the better the interview. ② 위기 관리에는 전문가의 조언이 필요하다.
② 
The company buys your creativity, not your image. ③ 합리적 소비는 필요와 욕구의 구분에서 비롯된다.
③ 
Interviewing is no more than expressing yourself. ④ 폭넓은 인간 관계는 성공의 필수 요소이다.
④ 
⑤ 실패를 빨리 극복하는 것이 성공의 열쇠이다.
Too much confidence in your vision doesn’t help.
⑤ 
I
19. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘ ’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
As I walked to the train station, I felt the warm sun on my 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
back. I caught my train on time. It arrived at my destination ten 
Woman:
minutes early, which was perfect, as I was due to present my 
I’ll write it down for you then.
① 
new idea to the company at 10 a.m. The presentation went better 
You should share it with others.
② 
than expected, and my manager seemed particularly pleased. 
You prepared a lot for the event.
③ 
Later that day, my manager called me into her office. She smiled 
I can memorize your phone number.
④ 
at me and said, “James, you’ve been with us for six years now. 
Let’s go to the history museum now.
⑤ 
How would you feel if I were to offer you the Sales Director 
position in London?” Sales Director in London! Wow! This was 
Peter Sandra
15. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가  에게 할 말로 가장 
a dream come true for me. I couldn’t believe what I had just heard!
적절한 것을 고르시오.  [3점]
Peter: Sandra,  joyful jealous outraged
①  ②  ③ 
①  I think you need to take a break for a while. ④  confused ⑤  indifferent
I recommend you return your book soon.
② 
I’d suggest changing where you study.
③  [20～21] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
you’d better review what you learned.
④  20. Many disciplines are better learned by entering into the 
you should’ve slept more last night.
⑤ 
doing than by mere abstract study. This is often the case with 
the  most  abstract  as  well  as  the  seemingly  more  practical 
[16～17] 다음을 듣고, 물음에 답하시오.
disciplines. For example, within the philosophical disciplines, 
16. 여자가 하는 말의 주제로 가장 적절한 것은? logic must be learned through the use of examples and actual 
①  consequences of communication problems problem solving. Only after some time and struggle does the 
②  difficulties of managing a relationship student begin to develop the insights and intuitions that enable 
③  various merits of having hobbies him  to  see  the  centrality  and  relevance  of  this  mode  of 
causes of conflict within a family
④  thinking. This learning by doing is essential in many of the 
ways of making peace with family members
⑤  sciences. For instance, only after a good deal of observation do 
the sparks in the bubble chamber become recognizable as the 
17. 언급된 물건이 아닌  것은? specific movements of identifiable particles.
a letter a picture cookies
①  ②  ③  history of science education
① 
earrings flowers
④  ⑤  limitations of learning strategies
② 
importance of learning by doing
③ 
  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의  effects of intuition on scientific discoveries
④ 
지시에 따라 답을 하시기 바랍니다. difference between philosophy and science
⑤ 
2
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.3
홀수형
21. The  most  normal  and  competent  child  encounters  what  23. The key to successful risk taking is to understand that the 
seem like insurmountable problems in living. But by playing  actions you’re taking should be the natural next step. One of 
them  out,  he  may  become  able  to  cope  with  them  in  a  the mistakes we often make when confronting a risk situation 
step-by-step process. He often does so in symbolic ways that  is our tendency to focus on the end result. Skiers who are 
are hard for even him to understand, as he is reacting to inner  unsure of themselves often do this. They’ll go to the edge of a 
processes  whose  origin  may  be  buried  deep  in  his  difficult  slope,  look  all  the  way  down  to  the  bottom,  and 
unconscious. This may result in play that makes little sense to  determine that the slope is too steep for them to try. The ones 
us  at  the  moment,  since  we  do  not  know  the  purposes  it  that decide to make it change their focus by analyzing what 
serves. When there is no immediate danger, it is usually best  they need to do to master the first step, like getting through 
to approve of the child’s play without interfering. Efforts to  the  first  mogul  on  the  hill.  Once  they  get  there,  they 
assist him in his struggles, while well intentioned, may divert  concentrate on the next mogul, and over the course of the run, 
him from seeking and eventually finding the solution that will  they end up at the bottom of what others thought was an 
serve him best. impossible mountain.
①  dangers of playing violent games to mental health *mogul: 모굴(스키의 활주 사면에 있는 단단한 눈 더미)
beneficial influence of playing outdoors in childhood 
②  Separating the Possible from the Impossible
① 
children’s play as problem solving with minimal intervention 
③ Focus on the Next Step, Not the Final Result
② 
necessity of intervening in disputes between siblings
④  Start with Ultimate Goals in Mind!
③ 
parental roles in children’s physical development
⑤  The Wonders of Committed Efforts
④ 
Success Through Risk Avoidance
⑤ 
[22～23] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Georg Dionysius Ehret
22. At some time in their lives, most people pause to reflect on  24. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 
their own moral principles and on the practical implications of  않는  것은?
those  principles,  and  they  sometimes  think  about  what  The  18th  century  is  called  the  Golden  Age  of  botanical 
principles people should have or which moral standards can  painting, and Georg Dionysius Ehret is often praised as the 
be best justified. When a person accepts a moral principle,  greatest  botanical  artist  of  the  time.  Born  in  Heidelberg, 
naturally the person believes the principle is important and  Germany, he was the son of a gardener who taught him much 
well justified. But there is more to moral principles than that.  about art and nature. As a young man, Ehret traveled around 
When a principle is part of a person’s moral code, that person  Europe, largely on foot, observing plants and developing his 
is  strongly  motivated  toward  the  conduct  required  by  the  artistic  skills.  In  Holland,  he  became  acquainted  with  the 
principle,  and  against  behavior  that  conflicts  with  that  Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus. Through his collaborations with 
principle. The person will tend to feel guilty when his or her  Linnaeus and others, Ehret provided illustrations for a number 
own  conduct  violates  that  principle  and  to  disapprove  of  of significant horticultural publications. Ehret’s reputation for 
others whose behavior conflicts with it. Likewise, the person  scientific accuracy gained him many commissions from wealthy 
will tend to hold in esteem those whose conduct shows an  patrons, particularly in England, where he eventually settled.
abundance of the motivation required by the principle.
*horticultural: 원예(학)의
Feeling Guilty? Check Your Self-Esteem First
①  18
①  세기의 가장 위대한 식물 화가로서 칭송받는다.
Do Not Let Your Moral Principles Change!
② 
②  정원사의 아들이었다.
Moral Integrity: A Principle of Philosophy
③  ③  젊은 시절 주로 마차로 유럽을 여행하였다. 
How Do People Form Their Personalities?
④  ④ 다수의 원예 출판물에 삽화를 제공하였다.
Moral Principles: Guiding Our Conduct
⑤  ⑤  영국에 정착하였다.
3
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.4
홀수형
After-School Program
25. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? 27. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하지 
않는  것은?
AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM 
December 1, 2014 January 30, 2015
－
                    Are you looking for fun and exciting classes?
Come on down to the Green Hills Community Center to 
check out our FREE program for local teens!
Classes
Art, Music, Taekwondo
∙
Classes with fewer than 20 applicants will be canceled.
∙
The above graph shows the percentages of Americans aged  Time & Place
12-17 who posted certain types of personal information on  The program will run from Monday to Friday
∙
social media sites in 2006 and in 2012. The year 2012 saw  (5:00 pm to 7:00 pm).
①
an  overall  percentage  increase  in  each  category  of  posted  All classes will take place in the Simpson Building.
∙
personal information. In both years, the percentage of the 
② How to sign up
young Americans who posted photos of themselves was the 
Registration forms must be sent by email to the address 
∙
highest of all the categories. In 2006, the percentage of 
③ below by 6:00 pm, November 28. Please download the 
those who posted city or town names was higher than that of 
forms from our website at www.greenhills.org.
those who posted school names. Regarding posted email 
④  For additional information, please visit our website
addresses, the percentage of 2012 was three times higher than 
or send an email to bill@greenhills.org.
that of 2006. Compared to 2006, 2012 recorded an eighteen 
⑤
percent increase in the category of cell phone numbers.
①  지역의 십 대들을 위한 무료 프로그램이다.
20
②  신청자가  명 미만인 수업은 취소된다.
Simpson Building
③  모든 수업은  에서 진행된다.
Short Film Festival ④  등록 신청서는 직접 방문하여 제출해야 한다.
26. 에 관한 다음 안내문의 내용과 일치하는  것은?
⑤  추가 정보는 웹사이트나 이메일을 이용하면 된다.
SHORT FILM FESTIVAL
We will be hosting nine short films, which were written, 
directed, acted and produced by students from the College 
of Performing Arts & Film, Pamil University.
28. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?  [3점]
Date: Friday, November 21, 2014
∙
During the early stages when the aquaculture industry was 
Time: 7:00 pm 10:00 pm
∙ －
rapidly expanding, mistakes were made and these were costly 
Place: Pamil Auditorium, Pamil University
∙
both in terms of direct losses and in respect of the industry’s 
Price:
∙
image.  High-density  rearing  led  to  outbreaks  of  infectious 
$10(general admission)
diseases that in some cases  devastated not just the caged 
$5 (discount for all university students with a valid ID) ①
fish, but local wild fish populations too. The negative impact 
- Tickets can be purchased from the student union
on local wildlife inhabiting areas  close to the fish farms 
office from Monday, November 17, 2014. ②
continues to be an ongoing public relations problem for the 
- All tickets are non-refundable.
industry.  Furthermore,  a  general  lack  of  knowledge  and 
- FREE beverage included in ticket price
insufficient care being taken when fish pens were initially 
For more information, please call the student union
∙
constructed  meaning that pollution from excess feed and 
office at (343) 777-8338. ③
fish waste created huge barren underwater deserts. These were 
costly  lessons  to  learn,  but  now  stricter  regulations  are  in 
①  교수들이 제작한 영화가 상영된다.
②  오전에 세 시간 동안 진행된다. place to ensure that fish pens are placed in sites ④where there 
③  영화 전공 학생에게만 입장료를 할인해 준다.  is good water flow to remove fish waste. This, in addition to 
④  입장권은 환불이 가능하다. other methods that decrease the overall amount of uneaten 
⑤  무료 음료가 입장료에 포함된다. food,  has helped aquaculture to clean up its act.
⑤
4
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.5
홀수형
29. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은? [31～33] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
Nancy was struggling to see the positive when ①her teen  31. The concept of humans doing multiple things at a time has 
daughter was experiencing a negative perspective on her life  been studied by psychologists since the 1920s, but the term 
and abilities. In her desire to parent intentionally,  she went  “multitasking”  didn’t  exist  until  the  1960s.  It  was  used  to 
②
into her daughter’s room and noted one positive accomplishment  describe computers, not people. Back then, ten megahertz was 
she had observed. “I know you’ve been having a hard time  so fast that a new word was needed to describe a computer’s 
lately, and you aren’t feeling really good or positive about  ability  to  quickly  perform  many  tasks.  In  retrospect,  they 
your life. But you did a great job cleaning up your room  probably made a poor choice, for the expression “multitasking” 
today, and  I know that must have been a big effort for you.”  is inherently deceptive. Multitasking is about multiple tasks 
③
The  next  day,  to  Nancy’s  surprise,  the  teen  girl  seemed  alternately sharing one resource (the CPU), but in time the 
somewhat cheerful. In passing,  she said, “Mom, thanks for  context was flipped and it became interpreted to mean multiple 
④
saying the positive thing about me yesterday. I was feeling so  tasks being done simultaneously by one resource (a person). It 
down and couldn’t think of anything good about myself. After  was  a  clever  turn  of  phrase  that’s  misleading,  for  even 
you said that positive thing, it helped me see one good  computers can process only one piece of code at a time. When 
⑤
quality in myself, and I’ve been holding onto those words.” they “multitask,” they switch back and forth, alternating their 
attention  until  both  tasks  are  done.  The  speed  with  which 
computers tackle multiple tasks that 
everything happens at the same time, so comparing computers 
to humans can be confusing.
  [3점]
expels the myth feeds the illusion
①  ② 
conceals the fact proves the hypothesis
③  ④ 
blurs the conviction
⑤ 
(A), (B), (C)
30. 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
적절한 것은?  [3점]
While the eye sees at the surface, the ear tends to penetrate 
below the surface. Joachim-Ernst Berendt points out that the ear 
is the only sense that (A) fuses/replaces an ability to measure 
with an ability to judge. We can discern different colors, but 
we can give a precise number to different sounds. Our eyes do  32. My friend was disappointed that scientific progress has not 
not let us perceive with this kind of (B) diversity/precision. An  cured the world’s ills by abolishing wars and starvation; that 
unmusical person can recognize an octave and, perhaps once  gross human inequality is still widespread; that happiness is 
instructed, a quality of tone, that is, a C or an F-sharp. Berendt  not universal. My friend made a common mistake―a basic 
points out that there are few ‘acoustical illusions’ something  misunderstanding in the nature of knowledge. Knowledge is 
―
sounding like something that in fact it is not―while there are  amoral―not immoral but morality neutral. It can be used for 
many  optical  illusions.  The  ears  do  not  lie.  The  sense  of  any purpose, but many people assume it will be used to further 
hearing gives us a remarkable connection with the invisible,  their favorite hopes for society―and this is the fundamental flaw. 
underlying order of things. Through our ears we gain access to  Knowledge of the world is one thing; its uses create a separate 
vibration, which (C) underlies/undermines everything around  issue. To be disappointed that our progress in understanding 
us. The sense of tone and music in another’s voice gives us an  has not remedied the social ills of the world is a legitimate 
enormous amount of information about that person, about her  view, but . 
stance toward life, about her intentions. To argue that knowledge is not progressing because of the 
African or Middle Eastern conflicts misses the point. There is 
acoustical: 
* 청각의 
nothing inherent in knowledge that dictates any specific social 
or moral application.
(A) (B) (C)   [3점]
① fuses …… precision …… undermines ① to confuse this with the progress of knowledge is absurd
② replaces …… diversity …… underlies ② to know the nature of knowledge is to practice its moral value
③ fuses …… diversity …… undermines ③ to remove social inequality is the inherent purpose of knowledge
replaces precision underlies
④ …… …… to accumulate knowledge is to enhance its social application
④
fuses precision underlies
⑤ …… …… to make science progress is to make it cure social ills
⑤
5
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.6
홀수형
33. According to a renowned French scholar, the growth in the  35. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은? 
size and complexity of human populations was the driving 
A  currently  popular  attitude  is  to  blame  technology  or 
force in the evolution of science. Early, small communities had 
technologists  for  having  brought  on  the  environmental 
to concentrate all their physical and mental effort on survival; 
problems we face today, and thus to try to slow technological 
their  thoughts  were  focused  on  food  and  religion.  As 
advance by blocking economic growth. We believe this view 
communities became larger, some people had time to reflect 
to  be  thoroughly  misguided. If  technology  produced 
①
and debate. They found that they could understand and predict 
automobiles that pollute the air, it is because pollution was not 
events better if they reduced passion and prejudice, replacing 
recognized as a problem which engineers had to consider in 
these  with  observation  and  inference.  But  while  a  large 
their designs. Solar energy can be a practical alternative 
②
population  may  have  been  necessary,  in  itself  it  was  not 
energy source for us in the foreseeable future. Obviously, 
③
sufficient for science to germinate. Some empires were big, 
technology that produces pollution is generally cheaper, but 
but the rigid social control required to hold an empire together 
now that it has been decided that cleaner cars are wanted, less 
was not beneficial to science, just as it was not beneficial to 
polluting cars will be produced; cars which scarcely pollute at 
reason.  The  early  nurturing  and  later  flowering  of  science         
all could even be made. This last option, however, would 
                                                                                  to support  ④
require  several  years  and  much  investment. Although 
original  thought  and  freewheeling  incentive.  The  rise  in  ⑤
technology  is  responsive  to  the  will  of  the  people,  it  can 
commerce and the decline of authoritarian religion allowed 
seldom respond instantaneously and is never free.
science to follow reason in seventeenth-century Europe.
  [3점]
*germinate: 싹트다, 발아하다
prompted small communities to adopt harsh social norms
①
resulted from passion and enthusiasm rather than inference
②
occurred in large communities with strict hierarchical structures
③
were solely attributed to efforts of survival in a small community [36～37] 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 
④
required a large and loosely structured, competitive community 것을 고르시오.
⑤
36.
The impact of color has been studied for decades. For 
(A) (B) example, in a factory, the temperature was maintained at 
34. 다음 글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
72  and the walls were painted a cool blue-green. The 
New  media  can  be  defined  by  four  characteristics  ℉
employees complained of the cold.
simultaneously: they are media at the turn of the 20th and 21st 
centuries which are both integrated and interactive and use 
(A) The psychological effects of warm and cool hues seem to 
digital code and hypertext as technical means. It follows that 
be used effectively by the coaches of the Notre Dame 
their  most  common  alternative  names  are  multimedia, 
football team. The locker rooms used for half-time breaks 
interactive media and digital media. By using this definition, 
were  reportedly  painted  to  take  advantage  of  the 
it is easy to identify media as old or new.  (A) , 
emotional impact of certain hues.
traditional television is integrated as it contains images, sound 
(B) The home-team room was painted a bright red, which 
and text, but it is not interactive or based on digital code. The 
kept  team  members  excited  or  even  angered.  The 
plain old telephone was interactive, but not integrated as it 
visiting-team room was painted a blue-green, which had a 
only transmitted speech and sounds and it did not work with 
calming effect on the team members. The success of this 
digital  code.  In  contrast,  the  new  medium  of  interactive 
application of color can be noted in the records set by 
television adds interactivity and digital code.  (B) , 
Notre Dame football teams.
the new generations of mobile or fixed telephony are fully 
digitalized and integrated as they add text, pictures or video  (C) The temperature was maintained at the same level, but the 
and they are connected to the Internet. walls were painted a warm coral. The employees stopped 
complaining  about  the  temperature  and  reported  they 
(A) (B)
were quite comfortable.
For example Additionally
① ……
Nevertheless In other words *hue: 색조, 색상 
② ……
Therefore Additionally (A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
③ …… ①  － － ②  － －
For example In other words (B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B) 
④ …… ③  － － ④  － －
Nevertheless Consequently (C) (B) (A)
⑤ …… ⑤  － －
6
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.7
홀수형
37.   39.  
Food  plays  a  large  part  in  how  much  you  enjoy  the  They  also  rated  how  generally  extroverted  those  fake 
outdoors.  The  possibilities  are  endless,  so  you  can  extroverts appeared, based on their recorded voices and 
constantly vary your diet. body language.
(A) They walk only a few miles each day and may use the  Some years ago, a psychologist named Richard Lippa called 
same  campsite  for  several  nights.  Survival  eaters  eat  a group of introverts to his lab and asked them to act like 
some dry cereal for breakfast, and are up and walking  extroverts while pretending to teach a math class. ( ) Then 
①
within minutes of waking. he and his team, with video cameras in hand, measured the 
length of their strides, the amount of eye contact they made 
(B) Wilderness dining has two extremes: gourmet eaters and 
with  their  “students,”  the  percentage  of  time  they  spent 
survival eaters. The first like to make camp at lunchtime 
talking, and the volume of their speech. ( ) Then Lippa 
so they have several hours to set up field ovens; they bake  ②
did the same thing with actual extroverts and compared the 
cakes and bread and cook multi-course dinners.
results. ( ) He found that although the latter group came 
③
(C) They walk dozens of miles every day; lunch is a series of 
across as more extroverted, some of the fake extroverts were 
cold  snacks  eaten  on  the  move.  Dinner  consists  of  a 
surprisingly  convincing. ( ) It  seems  that  most  of  us 
④
freeze-dried meal, “cooked” by pouring hot water into the 
know how to fake it to some extent. ( ) Whether or not 
⑤
package.
we’re aware that the length of our strides and the amount of 
time we spend talking and smiling mark us as introverts and 
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
①  － － ②  － －
extroverts, we know it unconsciously.
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)   [3점]
③  － － ④  － －
(C) (B) (A)
⑤  － －
(A)
40. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Plato  and  Tolstoy  both  assume  that  it  can  be  firmly 
[38～39] 글의 흐름으로 보아, 주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장  established that certain works have certain effects. Plato is 
적절한 곳을 고르시오. sure that the representation of cowardly people makes us 
cowardly; the only way to prevent this effect is to suppress 
38.
such representations. Tolstoy is confident that the artist 
The researchers had made this happen by lengthening the  who sincerely expresses feelings of pride will pass those 
period of daylight to which the peach trees on whose roots  feelings on to us; we can no more escape than we could 
the insects fed were exposed.  escape an infectious disease. In fact, however, the effects 
of art are neither so certain nor so direct. People vary a 
Exactly how cicadas keep track of time has always intrigued 
great deal both in the intensity of their response to art and 
researchers, and it has always been assumed that the insects 
in the form which that response takes. Some people may 
must rely on an internal clock. Recently, however, one group 
indulge fantasies of violence by watching a film instead of 
of scientists working with the 17-year cicada in California 
working out those fantasies in real life. Others may be 
have suggested that the nymphs use an external cue and that 
disgusted by even glamorous representations of violence. 
they  can  count. ( ) For  their  experiments  they  took 
① Still  others  may  be  left  unmoved,  neither  attracted  nor 
15-year-old  nymphs  and  moved  them  to  an  experimental 
disgusted.
enclosure. ( ) These nymphs should have taken a further  󰀻
②
two years to emerge as adults, but in fact they took just one 
year. ( ) By  doing  this,  the  trees  were  “tricked”  into  Although Plato and Tolstoy claim that works of art have 
③
flowering twice during the year rather than the usual once.  a(n) (A)  impact on people’s feelings, the degrees 
(   ) Flowering in trees coincides with a peak in amino acid  and forms of people’s actual responses  (B)  greatly.
④
concentrations in the sap that the insects feed on. ( ) So it 
⑤
(A) (B) (A) (B)
seems that the cicadas keep track of time by counting the 
unavoidable differ direct converge
peaks. ① …… ② ……
temporary fluctuate unexpected converge
*nymph: 애벌레 ③ …… ④ ……
**sap: 수액 ⑤ favorable ……differ
7
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.8
홀수형
(B)
[41～42] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
Before  long,  the  reality  hit  Jeremy  hard.  Even  after 
Increased size affects group life in a number of ways. There 
spending  many  hours  each  day  preparing  lesson  plans,  it 
is evidence that larger groups (five or six members) are more 
became clear that his methods were not working. One of the 
productive  than  smaller  groups  (two  or  three  members). 
worst  moments  was  when  (b)he  distributed  a  math  test. 
Members of larger groups tend to offer more suggestions than 
Many students didn’t even look at the exam. They just put 
members of smaller groups, and although they seem to reach 
their  heads  on  their  desks  and  slept.  Jeremy  became  so 
less agreement, they also show less tension. These differences 
stressed that he even dreaded going into his classroom.
may  reflect  the  greater  need  of  larger  groups  to  solve 
organizational  problems.  Members  may  realize  that  their  (C)
behavior must become more goal-directed, since it is unlikely 
After  graduation,  Jeremy  joined  an  organization  that 
that they can coordinate their actions without making a special 
recruits future leaders to teach in low-income communities. 
effort to do so. Larger groups also put more pressure on their 
(c)He was assigned to a small school in a poor rural county 
members to conform. In such groups, it is harder for everyone 
in North Carolina. Later, his assistant principal took note of 
to take part equally in discussions or to have the same amount 
Jeremy’s high expectations and asked him to take over (d)his 
of influence on decisions.
math class. He took charge of about a dozen failing “special ed” 
There  is  evidence  that  groups  with  an  even  number  of 
kids, and Tisha and Kelly were among them. His idealism 
members differ from groups with an odd number of members. 
ran high, and he thought he would be able to magically fix 
The former disagree more than the latter and suffer more 
all of their problems.
deadlocks  as  a  result.  Groups  with  an  even  number  of 
members may split into halves. This is impossible in groups  (D)
with an odd number of members one side always has a 
― Jeremy knew something had to change. (e)He then thought 
numerical  advantage.  According  to  some  researchers,  the 
back to my class, remembering how negative emotions can 
number  five  has  special  significance.  Groups  of  this  size  drag you down, leaving positive emotions unnoticed. That’s 
usually the  problems  we  have  just  outlined.  when he decided to focus more on building positive attitudes 
Moreover, they are not plagued by the fragility and tensions  within the classroom. He borrowed lessons from my positive 
found in groups of two or three. Groups of five rate high in  psychology class and even mentioned my name to his students. 
member satisfaction; because of the odd number of members,  As  the  students’  attitudes  became  more  optimistic,  their 
deadlocks are unlikely when disagreements occur. confidence with math grew too. At the end of the school year, 
80 percent of Jeremy’s students passed the state’s math test.
 
41. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
(A)
Why the Number of Group Members Counts 43. 주어진 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
① 
가장 적절한 것은?
Individuality vs. Collectivity in the Workplace 
② 
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
③  Equal Opportunities: Toward Maximum Satisfaction ①  － － ②  － －
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
How to Cope with Conflicts in Groups ③  － － ④  － －
④ 
Agreement on Group Size Pays Off! ⑤  (D)－(C)－(B)
⑤ 
(a) (e)
44. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
42. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?  [3점]
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
probe escape mirror ①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
①  ②  ③ 
trigger escalate
④  ⑤ 
Jeremy
45. 위 글의  에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
[43～45] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. ① 대학에서 긍정 심리학을 수강했다.
② 많은 시간을 들여 수업 계획서를 준비했다.
(A)
③ 스트레스로 인해 교실에 들어가기를 두려워했다.
In my office, I have a framed letterfrom a couple of children 
④ 저소득 지역에서 가르칠 미래 지도자를 모집하는 단체에 가입했다.
I have never met. The letter holds a special significance for me.  80
⑤ 학년말에 그의 학생의  퍼센트가 수학 시험에 불합격했다.
It reads, “Dear Dr. Brown, thanks for teaching Mr. Wills to 
teach Tisha and Kelly.” Mr. Wills is Jeremy Wills, and (a)he is 
*  확인 사항
one of my former students. A few years back, he took my 
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
positive psychology class in college.
하시오.
8
8
이 문제지에 관한 저작권은 한국교육과정평가원에 있습니다.1
2010학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
제 3 교시
홀수형
7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 
고르시오. 
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
to replace the old bed with a new one 
① 
to order a heater from the Internet
1. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 주문할 야외용 식탁을 고르시오. ② 
to set the room temperature higher
③ 
① ② ③ to buy an electric blanket
④ 
to go shopping together
⑤ 
      8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 
곳을 고르시오.
④ ⑤
①  학교 방송실 ②  신문사 편집실 ③  광고사 기획실
119
④    상황실 ⑤  도서관 휴게실
   
9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
①  보안 요원-가수 ②  스턴트맨-분장사
③  운동선수-트레이너 ④  영화감독-시나리오 작가
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
⑤  건축 설계사-건물주 
frustrated jealous indifferent
①  ②  ③ 
satisfied grateful
④    ⑤  10. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
①  마술 배우기 ②  노래 부르기
③  새장 준비하기 ④  마술 의상 빌려오기
3. 다음을 듣고,  무엇에 관한 설명인지 고르시오. ⑤  마술 클럽 가입하기
①  설사약 ②  멀미약 ③  항생제
④  소화제 ⑤  구충제 11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 공연을 관람하게 될 
날짜를 고르시오.
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.   
①  환영 표지판 만들기 ②  공항에 마중 나가기
③  집에 친구 초대하기 ④  자매 학교 방문하기
① ② ③ ④ ⑤
⑤  시내 관광 시켜주기
5. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
$180 $190 $220
①  ②  ③ 
$250 $290
④  ⑤ 
World Tea Championship
6. 다음을 듣고,  남자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  12. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
고르시오. 않는  것을 고르시오.
①  새로 개관한 공연장을 홍보하려고 ①  녹차를 포함하여 세 부문에서 경쟁이 이루어진다.
15
②  공연장 놀이방 운영을 공지하려고 ②  예선에서  개국을 대표하는 참가자들이 경쟁했다.
③  공연 장소 변경에 대해 사과하려고 ③  결선에서의 심사 기준은 색,  향,  맛이다.
④  공연장 내 질서 유지를 당부하려고 ④  결선 심사는 이전 우승자들이 담당한다.
Tea Master
⑤  공연장 물품 보관소에 대해 안내하려고 ⑤  결선 진출자들에게    칭호를 부여한다.
1
82 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점]
  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
This[this]
18. 밑줄 친  가 가리키는 것으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
This, in the simplest definition, is a promise enforceable 
by  law.  The  promise  may  be  to  do  something  or  to  stop 
from  doing  something.  The  making  of  this  requires  the 
mutual agreement of two or more persons or parties, one of 
them  ordinarily  making  an  offer  and  another  accepting.  If 
one of the parties fails to keep the promise, the other has 
rights to compensation. The law about this considers such 
questions as whether this exists, what the meaning of this 
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
is, whether this has been broken, and what compensation is 
due to the injured party.
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
적절한 것을 고르시오. ①  계약 ②  고소 ③  의회 ④  신용 ⑤  선거
Woman:                                             
He[he]
19. 밑줄 친  가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
I think so. My uncle likes the game, too.
① 
It was a beautiful Friday afternoon and the weekend was 
All right. I’ll go to the website right now.
② 
about to begin, but Rob had a lot on his mind.  He had 
Not really. The package will arrive in time. ①
③ 
been putting off doing his chemistry report which was due 
It’s my fault. I wish I hadn’t returned the game.
④ 
on Monday. After borrowing some books from the library, 
I agree. We shouldn’t download games illegally.
⑤ 
he  went  home.  Later  that  evening,  he  was  doing  the 
②
assignment when his father came in. “What are you doing, 
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  kid?”  he  asked.  “Biography  of  Marie  Curie,”  Rob  said 
적절한 것을 고르시오. absently as  he was typing on his computer. “Really? 
③
Man:  I did that for a chemistry assignment when I was in school,” 
                                                                                                   
his  father  said.  “Why  don’t  you  find  some  information 
Well done! I’ll buy you another monitor after work.
① 
from  the  encyclopedia  over  there?” he  added.  Rob 
Calm down. You can rewrite the report tomorrow. ④
② 
grabbed  the  encyclopedia.  He  smiled  thinking  that  even 
That’s incredible! The program is so easy to use.
③
though  he  was  practically  born  playing  computer  games, 
Thanks for the tip. I’ll go see if I can use it.
④ 
he  was  still  doing  the  same  assignments  his  father  did 
⑤
What a pity! I won’t back it up next time.
⑤ 
over 20 years ago.
16. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
20. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Upon  receiving  your  last  letter,  I  rushed  to  look  up 
Woman: 
                                                                                              the  word  ‘flattering’  in  the  dictionary.  I  was  shocked 
Not at all. It’s my pleasure to help you out. to  find  out  that  it  could  imply something negative, which 
① 
I’m afraid it’s too late to make a reservation. I  certainly  did  not  mean.  I  should  have  used  some  word 
② 
I think taking the train will be better for me. like ‘complimentary’ instead. For that, I would like to ask 
③ 
It’s OK. We’ll get there in about half an hour. for  the  kindness  in  your  heart  to  forgive  my  unintended 
④ 
I don’t think so. I planned to meet my friend here. offense. If you knew me well, you would know that I am 
⑤ 
shameless  enough  to  take  all  compliments  at  their  face 
value  and  not  to  think  that  they  might  be  mere  flattery. 
Julie
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  아버지가  에게 할 말로 가장 
I just did not know what the word really implied. I hope 
적절한 것을 고르시오.
that you no longer feel hurt or uncomfortable in any way 
Julie’s father:                                        
as a result of our correspondence.
Be happy. At least you’re healthy.
①
① 무례한 태도에 대하여 항의하려고
Cheer up. Let’s take it to another hospital.
②
② 훌륭하게 쓰여진 편지를 칭찬하려고
I’m sorry. There’s nothing we can do anyway.
③
③ 단어를 잘못 사용한 것에 대하여 사과하려고
That’s too bad. I’ve always liked cats better anyway.
④
④ 전문 용어에 대한 정확한 의미를 문의하려고
Don’t worry. There are six other puppies to play with.
⑤ ⑤ 좋은 사전을 선물해 준 것에 대하여 감사하려고
2
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 33
(A) (B) (C)
21. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장  [24～28] 다음 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은? 24. In this modern world, people are not used to living with 
While awaiting the birth of a new baby, North American  discomfort.  We  expect  immediate  results  and  satisfaction. 
parents  typically  furnish  a  room  as  the  infant’s  sleeping  We want answers faster than they can be delivered. There 
quarters. For decades, child-rearing advice from experts has  is  twenty-four-hour  repair  and  round-the-clock  shopping. 
(A) encouraged/beenencouraged  the nighttime separation of  If  we  are  hungry,  there  is  always  food  available,  from 
baby  from  parent.  For  example,  a  study  recommends  that  microwave  dinners  to  all-night  grocery  stores  and 
babies be moved into their own room by three months of  restaurants.  People  no  longer  know  how  to  wait,  or  even 
what waiting means. It is nice to have what you want when 
age.  “By  six  months  a  child  (B) who/whom  regularly 
you want it, but the ability to delay satisfaction is important.  
sleeps in her parents’ room is likely to become dependent 
                     is  clearly  an  important  virtue,  yet 
on  this  arrangement,”  reports  the  study.  Yet  parent-infant 
so many people stand in front of their microwaves thinking 
‘co-sleeping’  is  the  norm  for  approximately  90  percent  of 
“Hurry up!”
the  world’s  population.  Cultures  as  (C) diverse/diversely 
as  the  Japanese,  the  Guatemalan  Maya,  and  the  Inuit  of  ①  Ambition ②  Patience ③  Honesty
Modesty Diligence
Northwestern Canada practice it. ④  ⑤ 
(A) (B) (C) 25. The  goal  of  medicine  as  it  is  currently  practiced  is  to 
encouraged who diverse develop  procedures  and  drugs  that  work  equally  well  on 
① …… ……
encouraged whom diversely all  patients,  regardless  of  gender,  age,  or  genetics.  It 
②  …… ……
encouraged who diversely derives from the prevalent belief that all of us are similar 
③  …… ……
bio-mechanical units that rolled off the same assembly line
been encouraged who diverse
④ …… ……
a most imperfect conception of human beings that limits 
been encouraged whom diverse ―
⑤ …… ……
conventional medicine’s effectiveness. The doctor of the future, 
however,  needs  to  practice  medicine  in  fundamentally 
22. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은? different ways. One of the most important shifts will be an 
While  manned  space  missions  are  more  costly  than  increased recognition of                     , a concept 
now  largely  ignored.  Instead  of  treating  different  patients 
unmanned ones,  they  are  more  successful.  Robots  and 
①
that  display  similar  symptoms  with  the  same  drugs, 
astronauts use much of the same equipment in space. But 
②
doctors should identify root causes of disease to come up 
a  human  is  much  more  capable  of  operating  those 
with a personalized treatment. 
instruments correctly and  to place them in appropriate and 
③
useful positions. Rarely ④is a computer more sensitive and  ①  group therapy ②  patient individuality
medical technology doctors’ qualifications
accurate than a human in managing the same geographical  ③  ④ 
wonder drugs
or environmental factors. Robots are also not equipped with  ⑤ 
capabilities like humans to solve problems as they arise, 
⑤ 26. For the most part, we like things that are familiar to us. 
and they often collect data that are unhelpful or irrelevant.
To prove the point to yourself, try a little experiment. Get 
the negative of an old photograph that shows a front view 
of your face and have it developed into a pair of pictures
―
23. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은? one  that  shows  you  as  you  actually  look  and  one  that 
Most of you experience urges when trying to break a habit  shows  a  reverse  image  so  that  the  right  and  left  sides  of 
and these can be hard to resist unless you find something  your  face  are  interchanged.  Now  decide  which  version  of 
else to do instead, and best of all, something that uses the  your  face  you  like  better  and  ask  a  good  friend  to  make 
same part of the body even the same muscles.  If the  the  choice,  too.  If  you  are  like  most  people,  you  should 
― ①
notice  something  odd:  Your  friend  will  prefer  the  true 
habit involves your hands, as when pulling out hair, then try 
print, but you will prefer the reverse image. Why? Because 
to occupy them in some other way.  Playing with a toy or 
②
you both will be responding favorably to the more familiar 
opening and closing your fists for a couple of minutes might 
face your friend to                      and you to the 
be  an  answer.  The  habit  of  scratching  can  be  replaced  ―
③
reversed one you find in the mirror every day. 
[3점]
with rubbing in some lotion or patting with the palm of the 
hand. If  the  itches,  however,  do  not  disappear,  stop  *negative: [사진] 원판
④ his own true face
① 
scratching  and  take  the  medicine. One 35-year-old 
⑤ other people’s faces
② 
woman who used to rub her eyes with her hands until they 
the one the world sees
③ 
became sore and infected found it helpful to put on make-up  the negative of his own face
④ 
when she was tempted to rub. the one more recently photographed
⑤ 
3
84 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
27. The human auditory system                          .  ①  calm and peaceful ②  lively and festive
A  psychologist  named  Richard  Warren  demonstrated  this  funny and amusing exciting and thrilling
③  ④ 
particularly  well.  He  recorded  a  sentence  and  cut  out  a  promising and hopeful
⑤ 
piece of the sentence from the recording tape. He replaced 
the  missing  piece  with  a  burst  of  static  of  the  same 
30. 다음 그림에 대한 글의 내용 중, 밑줄 친 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
duration. Nearly everyone who heard the altered recording 
않은  것은?
could report that they heard both a sentence and static. But 
a  majority  of  people  could  not  tell  where  the  static  was! 
The  auditory  system  had  filled  in  the  missing  speech 
information, so that the sentence seemed uninterrupted. Most 
people  reported  that  there  was  static  and  that  it  existed 
apart from the spoken sentence. The static and the sentence 
formed separate perceptual streams due to differences in the 
quality of sound that caused them to group separately.
*static:  잡음(雜音) Figures A and B demonstrate how dew point is measured 
recognizes incorrect pronunciation
①  by a dew point hygrometer. In Figure A, light is transmitted 
plays an important role in speaking
② 
from a laser and reflected off the mirror onto a receiver 
①
has its own version of perceptual completion
③ 
that measures the intensity of the observed light. When the 
reacts differently according to different languages
④ 
mirror temperature is above dew point and the intensity of 
analyzes auditory and visual cues at the same time
⑤ 
the  transmitted  light  is  10mW/cm2,  the  intensity  of  the 
28. Not  all  authors  trusted  that  the  theater  audience  would  observed light is ②the same. In Figure B, when the mirror 
automatically  understand  their  plays  in  the  intended  temperature is at dew point, dew drops cover the surface 
③
manner. Thus, they repeatedly attempted to make it clear to  of the mirror. When the transmitted light hits the dew drops, 
their public that visiting the theater was not merely for the  it becomes scattered. As a consequence, compared to the 
④
purpose  of  entertainment,  but  rather  to  draw  lessons  from 
intensity of the transmitted light, that of the observed light 
the  play  offered  onstage.  It  was,  therefore,  important  for 
measured by the receiver is  increased.
⑤
the viewer                               so as to facilitate 
*hygrometer: 습도계  **mW/cm2: 빛의 세기 단위
interpretation  of  the  content.  This  idea  was  developed  by 
Bertolt Brecht with his ‘epic theater,’ which used alienation 
(A) (B) (C)
31. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 적절한 
as a strategy to prevent the identification of the public with 
것은?
the  figures  of  the  drama.  Through  scattered  narration  and 
commentary throughout the play, for example, the viewers  Responses  to  survey  questions  are  influenced  by  events, 
are  invited  to  take  a  step  back  from  the  performance.  In  and we should consider this when reviewing the results of 
this way, they are given hints to better understand the play  a  survey.  The  reputation  of  an  airline,  for  example,  will 
while  the  conclusion  is  left  open  so  as  to  leave  them  to  be (A)  damaged/recovered if  a  survey  is  conducted  just 
draw their own conclusions.  after  a  plane  crash.  A  computer  company  lost  its 
[3점]
reputation  in  company  surveys  just  after  major  news 
to imitate the actor’s performance
① 
to learn about the play beforehand coverage  about  a  defect  in  its  products.  On  the  positive 
② 
to identify himself with the actors on the stage side,  surveys  by  a  beverage  company  about  its  image 
③ 
to bridge the gap between himself and the actors showed  very (B) hostile/favorable public  attitudes  just 
④ 
to create a distance from the actions on the stage after its massive investment in the Olympics. Consequently, 
⑤ 
surveys should be conducted when the organization is not 
29. 다음 글의 상황에 나타난 분위기로 가장 적절한 것은?
in  the  news  or  connected  to  a  significant  event  that 
After dinner he built a fire, going out into the weather for 
may  influence  public  opinion.  In  neutral  context,  a  more 
wood he had piled against the garage. The air was bright 
(C) valid/biased survey  can  be  conducted  about  an 
and cold against his face, and the snow in the driveway was 
organization’s reputation, products, or services.
already halfway to his knees. He gathered logs, shaking off 
their soft white caps and carrying them inside. He sat for a     (A)     (B)  (C)
time in front of the fireplace, cross-legged, adding logs, and  damaged hostile biased
① …… ……
gazing  at  the  warm  fire.  Outside,  snow  continued  to  fall  damaged hostile valid
②  …… ……
quietly in the cones of light cast by the streetlights. By the  damaged favorable valid
③  …… ……
time  he  rose  and  looked  out  the  window,  his  car  had  recovered hostile biased
④ …… ……
become a soft white hill on the edge of the street. recovered favorable valid
⑤ …… ……
4
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 55
(A) (B) the connectedness of elements in nature
32. 다음 글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? ① 
the importance of light as a food source
War  seems  to  be  part  of  the  history  of  humanity.  ② 
the effects of forest fires on the environment
Countries,  regions,  and  even  villages  were  economically  ③ 
 the causes of dramatic changes in the weather
independent  of  one  another  in  the  past.  Under  those  ④
the consequences of the destruction of ecosystems
circumstances,  the  destruction  of  our  enemy  might  have  ⑤ 
been  a  victory  for  us.  There  was  a  relevance  to  violence 
and war.    (A)   , today we are so interdependent that the  35. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  문장은?
concept  of  war  has  become  outdated.  When  we  face 
problems  or  disagreements  today,  we  have  to  arrive  at 
solutions through dialog. We must work to resolve conflicts 
in  a  spirit  of  reconciliation  and  always  keep  in  mind  the 
interests  of  others.  We  cannot  destroy  our  neighbors!  We 
cannot  ignore  their  interests!  Doing  so  would  ultimately 
cause us to suffer.    (B)   , the concept of violence is now 
unsuitable, and nonviolence is the appropriate method.
   (A)     (B)
However Otherwise
① ……
However Therefore
②  ……
Nonetheless Otherwise
③  ……
Similarly Therefore
④ ……
Similarly In contrast
⑤ …… The graph above shows the growth rate of total output in 
the U.S. from 1960 to 1999. The growth rate of total output 
is equal to the growth rate in the number of hours worked 
[33～34] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
plus the growth rate of labor productivity. The 1960 1969 
33. Imagine that you are in a meeting. Your party and the  ① -
period displayed the highest growth rate of total output of 
other party are sitting across a table. You ask a question on 
all  the  periods  in  the  graph. The  growth  rate  of  total 
②
a particular subject and the answer is unsatisfactory. What 
output declined from the 1960 1969 period to the 1980 1989 
- -
would be the best response? It is none at all. So if you are 
period. The  only  period  where  the  growth  rate  in  the 
③
seeking more information or a different kind of information, 
number  of  hours  worked  exceeded  the  labor  productivity 
ask for it by remaining silent. When there is a long pause 
growth rate was the 1980 1989 period. The 1990 1994 
- ④ -
in  the  conversation,  people  feel  an  overwhelming  need  to 
period showed an increase in the growth rate of total output 
fill  it.  If  someone  has  finished  speaking  and  you  do  not 
from the 1980 1989 period. The 1995 1999 period displayed 
- ⑤ -
play along by taking up your end of the dialog, that person  the second highest growth rate of total output and the greatest 
will  automatically  start  to  elaborate.  Eventually,  they  may  labor productivity growth rate of all the time periods.
say what you want to hear.
smallmouth bass
36. 다음 글에서  에 관한 내용과 일치하는 것은?
①  의견 교환 시 대화 예절의 중요성
Like  its  largemouth  cousin,  the  smallmouth  bass  is  a 
②  대화를 통한 창의적 사고 신장의 필요성
native  of  the  Mississippi  drainage,  which  makes  it  a  true 
③  바람직한 대화를 위한 적극적 태도의 필요성
heartland  fish.  Whereas  the  largemouth  likes  slow  or  still 
④  회의의 효율적 진행을 위한 사회자의 중요성
water  with  lots  of  food-holding  weeds,  the  smallmouth 
⑤  만족스러운 답변을 얻기 위한 침묵의 효용성
prefers  clean,  rocky  bottoms  and  swifter  water,  ideally  in 
34. A forest fire in Brazil affects the weather in Moscow by  the  range  of  65°  to  68°F.  In  waters  warmer  than  73°F, 
creating huge dust clouds that eventually float over Russia.  you  can  forget  about  finding  one.  In  lakes,  smallmouth 
often  school  up,  which  means  that  if  you  catch  one,  you 
Every  element  in  an  ecosystem  depends  on  every  other 
can  catch  a  bunch.  In  rivers  and  streams,  they  are  more 
element,  even  the  so-called  nonliving  elements  such  as 
solitary.  The  smallmouth  has  a  series  of  dark  vertical 
minerals,  oxygen,  and  sunlight.  Yes,  light  is  an  integral 
bands along its sides. The dorsal fin is one continuous fin 
element of all life. The sun is food for many of earth’s life 
(as opposed to the separated dorsal fin of the largemouth).
forms.  Physicists  speak  of  photons  of  light  as  being 
interchangeable.  When  the  light  from  an  object  hits  a  *dorsal fin: 등지느러미
person, only some of it bounces off. Most of the photons 
Mississippi
① 강으로 유입된 외래종이다.
are  absorbed  into  the  person.  Its  energy  becomes  that 
② 물의 흐름이 느린 곳을 좋아한다.
person’s energy. This is how incredible interdependence is
73°F
③   이상의 물에서 쉽게 찾아 볼 수 있다.
everything is constantly becoming everything else. 
―
④  호수보다 강에서 떼를 지어 다닌다. 
*photon: 광자(光子) ⑤  몸통의 옆면에는 거무스름한 띠들이 있다.
5
86 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
Chattanooga Old habits die hard.
37. 에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은? ① 
Time waits for no man.
Starting  in  the  1960s,  people  began  flooding  into  ② 
Two heads are better than one.
Chattanooga,  a  former  factory  town,  to  explore  its  caves,  ③ 
rivers,  and  cliffs.  Before  long  more  than  3,800  caves  Actions speak louder than words.
④ 
surrounding  the  city  had  been  discovered.  The  nearby  A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
⑤ 
Ocoee  was  among  the  most  paddled  rivers  in  the  country 
and  six  major  climbing  sites  sprang  up  within  an  hour’s 
40. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 
drive of city limits. But in spite of this boundless outdoors 
곳은?
potential,  there  remained  the  problem  of  Chattanooga 
proper,  a  post-industrial  wasteland  that  made  the  city  the 
However,  now  that  the  economy  is  characterized  more 
kind of place you would visit but would never want to live 
by  the  exchange  of  information  than  by  hard  goods, 
in.  Not,  that  is,  until  lately.  Over  the  past  decade, 
geographical centrality has been replaced by attempts to 
Chattanooga  has  made  an  incredible  urban  comeback: 
create a sense of cultural centrality. 
electric  buses,  organic  markets,  and  a  120-million-dollar 
riverfront  restoration  project  completed  last  year.  In 
Now,  as  always,  cities  are  desperate  to  create  the 
addition,  beautiful  modern  architecture  such  as  the 
impression that they lie at the center of something or other. 
post-modern  museum  and  the  newly  remodeled  aquarium 
( ) This  idea  of  centrality  may  be  locational,  namely 
plays a big role in the comeback of Chattanooga. ①
that a city lies at the geographical center of England, Europe, 
1960
① 강,  절벽 등을 탐험하기 위해  년대부터 사람들이 몰려들었다. 
and so on. ( ) This draws on a well-established notion 
②
3,800
② 주변에서  개 이상의 동굴들이 발견되었다.
that  geographical  centrality  makes  a  place  more  accessible, 
③ 주요 등반 장소가 도시 경계에서 차로 한 시간 이내의 거리에 생겼다.
easing  communication  and  communication  costs. ( ) 
③
④ 강변지역 복구 사업은 일억 이천만 달러를 들여 진행되고 있다.
Cultural centrality usually demonstrates itself as a cry that a 
⑤ 현대식 건축물들이 도시의 모습을 되찾는 데 큰 역할을 하고 있다.
city is at the center of the action. ( ) This means that 
④
[38～39] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  the  city  has  an  abundance  of  cultural  activities,  such  as 
38. In practical situations where there is no room for error,  restaurants, theater, ballet, music, sport, and scenery. ( ) 
⑤
we  have  learned  to  avoid  vagueness  in  communication.  A  The suggestion is that people will want for nothing in this 
fire  chief,  for  example,  needs  to  issue  his  orders  with 
city.
absolute clarity. In imaginative situations, however, there is 
the  danger  that  too  much  specificity  can  limit  your 
imagination.  Let’s  suppose  that  the  same  fire  chief  has 
asked you to paint a picture on the side of his firehouse. If 
he tells you what he wants it to look like right down to the 
last  detail,  he  has  not  given  you  any  room  for  your 
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
imagination.  However,  if  the  assignment  were  stated 
41. Young  children  rarely  think  of  their  art  as  personal 
somewhat  vaguely,  then  you  would  have  more  room  to 
property.  Often  they  throw  it  away  or  give  it  away.  This 
think and be more creative.
 
suggests that much of the value of art for a child consists 
① 소방관들은 업무 수행 시 정확한 의사소통이 필요하다.
in  making  it.  Interestingly,  art  in  tribal  societies  is 
② 상사는 부하의 업무에 지나치게 간섭하지 않는 것이 좋다.
frequently  abandoned  after  it  has  served  its  purpose.  The 
③ 정확한 정보 해석을 위해서 여러 가능성을 고려해야 한다.
focus is on the magical, expressive, and social value of the 
④ 대화에서는 애매한 표현을 사용하지 않는 것이 바람직하다.
act  of  making.  Some  contemporary  artists  share  this 
⑤ 상상력이 필요한 상황에서는 다소 모호한 말이 도움이 될 수 있다.
feeling,  but  they  are  also  caught  up  in  the  system  of  art 
39. Although a speech can be effective, all the words in the 
exhibition, the selling of their art, and the requirements of 
world  cannot  measure  up  to  the  example  of  a  leader, 
an art market. This results in a tension in the art world that 
especially  in  communicating  new  behaviors  and  values. 
is  largely  unresolved the  tension  between  art  as  a 
There  is  often  no  more  effective  way  to  help  people  ―
satisfying  mode  of  expression  and  art  as  a  precious 
understand the message than to have it modeled for them by 
collectible  object,  between  the  experience  of  making  and 
the manager. Words can yield a variety of interpretations in 
terms of the kind of behaviors people think they mean. But  the experience of owning. 
a  manager’s  actions  provide  a  clear  model  of  exactly  the 
Art in Tribal Societies
① 
kind  of  behavior  required.  Managers  who  want  people  to 
Conflicting Views on Art 
② 
take  a  more  team-based  approach  with  their  people,  for 
Traditional vs. Contemporary Art
example, will almost certainly get better results by taking a  ③ 
Using Art for Children’s Education
more  team-based  approach  themselves  rather  than  just  by  ④ 
making a speech on teamwork. Modern Art Museums: Magical Places
⑤ 
6
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 77
42. The  age  of  3½  is  not  without  its  charm.  One  of  the  44. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
more amusing aspects of this age is the child’s often vivid 
How can you create closeness when the two of you are 
imagination, expressed most strikingly in his enjoyment of 
hundreds of miles apart? How can you make the person you 
imaginary companions. Though some people have felt that 
are talking to on the phone feel special when you cannot pat 
only the lonely play with imaginary playmates, our research 
their back or give them a little hug? The answer is simple. 
makes  it  very  evident  that  it  is  often  the  highly  superior 
Just use your caller’s name far more often than you would 
and imaginative child who invents these creatures. They are 
in person. In fact, shower your conversations with his or her 
very real to him, very important, and, we can assure you, 
name.  Saying  a  person’s  name  too  often  in  face-to-face 
quite harmless. Even though it may be annoying to have to 
conversation  sounds  manipulative.  However,  on  the  phone 
lay  a  place  at  dinner  or  keep  an  extra  seat  in  the  family 
the effect is dramatically different. If you heard someone say 
automobile for his ‘friend’ who exists only in your child’s 
your name, even if you were being pushed around in a big 
imagination, it is probably well worthwhile.
noisy crowd, you would pay attention and listen.
Making New Friends at School
① 
① 멀리 사는 친구와의 우정을 위해 가끔씩 전화해라.   
Be a Role Model for Your Child
②  ② 대화 중에는 상대의 몸짓에 나타나는 의미를 잘 살펴라.
How Can You Make Your Child Creative?
③  ③ 공공장소에서는 너무 큰 소리로 전화 통화를 하지 마라.
Child’s Imaginary Friend: Need for Worry?
④  ④ 시끄러운 장소에서 친구와 대화할 때는 평소보다 천천히 말해라.
Various Aspects of Children’s Imagination
⑤  ⑤ 전화 통화에서 친밀감을 주려면 상대의 이름을 자주 불러주어라.
(A)
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에  들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Many  years  ago,  psychologists  performed  an 
experiment in which they put a number of people in a 
room, alone except for a ring toss set. It was one of those 
children’s toys with a short wooden post held upright on 
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은? the floor and a bunch of round rings. The subjects were 
left  alone  to  amuse  themselves  as  best  they  could.  As 
Rosalyn’s  parents  did  everything  possible  to  avoid 
expected, with time to kill, they began trying to toss the 
favoring one child over the others, and this resulted in 
rings around the post. What the psychologists discovered 
her  feelings  being  hurt.  One  year  Rosalyn  asked  her 
was that most of the people moved far enough away from 
mother  to  prepare  a  special  treat  for  her  birthday:  the 
the  post  so  that  tossing  the  rings  around  it  was 
honey cake that Rosalyn had always loved. 
challenging but not so difficult as to be totally frustrating. 
In  other  words,  they  deliberately  positioned  themselves 
(A) Upon receiving the cake, Rosalyn became disappointed. 
between frustration on the one hand and boredom on the 
It was, after all, her birthday; couldn’t she be singled 
other. The process of alternately producing and relieving 
out  on  one  day  of  the  year?  A  parent’s  admirable 
tension was what made the activity stimulating.
efforts not to play favorites can mean that no child gets 
󰀻
the whole cake of parental love.
(B) Her mother said she couldn’t. If she made a honey cake 
Subjects tended to make a ring toss activity stimulating 
for  Rosalyn,  she’d  have  to  make  cakes  for  Rosalyn’s 
by producing just enough    (A)    through varying the 
two sisters, and she didn’t have time to make three cakes.
distance to the post so as to    (B)    frustration and 
(C) In the end, her mother did give Rosalyn a honey cake  boredom.
on  her  birthday a  really  small  one,  because  she 
―
    (A)    (B)
split  the  batter  for  one  cake  into  three  parts,  to  treat 
tension create
her daughters equally. ① ……
tension balance
*batter: 반죽 ②  ……
competition multiply
③  ……
(A)-(C)-(B) (B)-(A)-(C) (B)-(C)-(A) energy hide
①  ②  ③  ④ ……
(C)-(A)-(B) (C)-(B)-(A) energy increase
④  ⑤  ⑤ ……
7
88 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
I
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.  48. 위 글의 ‘ ’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
Keene Portsmouth 9
(A) ① 과    사이의  번 도로변에 살았다.
② 식료품점에 가는 사람들의 수고를 덜어줄 수 있다고 생각했다.
On the wall of our dining room was a framed quotation: 
③ 식료품점의 당근과 토마토 광고를 주의깊게 보았다. 
“Let me live in a house by the side of the road and be a 
99
④ 토마토를 파운드당  센트에 팔았다.
friend  to  man.”  It  inspired  in  me  countless  childhood 
⑤ 모양이 이상해 식료품점에서 팔지 않는 야채도 가치있다고 생각했다.
daydreams about meeting new people from exotic places. 
I  was  a  child  who  desperately  wanted  to  connect  with 
[49∼50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 
others. We did live ‘by the side of the road’ on Route 9 
―
between  Keene  and  Portsmouth but  in  a  place  so 
― A friend of mine and his wife were in Hawaii, standing 
remote it was extremely difficult to be a ‘friend to man.’
on a beach, watching a beautiful sunset hardly able to 
―
believe  how  magnificent  the  sight  was.  A  woman 
(B)
approached  them  and  overheard  my  friend’s  wife  say, 
Why couldn’t others also benefit from that value? I could 
“I can’t believe how beautiful this is.” While walking away 
save people the trouble of going into the store by making 
from  the  spectacular  display,  the  woman  said,  “You 
my  produce  accessible  at  the  side  of  the  road,  and  that 
should have seen it in Tahiti.” 
would provide value, too. Surely I could convince people 
When your attention is not on the present moment but 
to pay half of what the grocery store charged and to feel 
on something else, you will tend to                     , 
lucky  about  the  bargain.  Suddenly,  I  saw  a  connection 
as the Tahiti traveler did, or you will wonder about future 
between  those  bumpy  vegetables  on  our  table  and  the 
experiences instead of enjoying the present one, and regret 
quotation on the wall; I found a way to satisfy my longing 
for                     . These homely fruits and vegetables  past experiences because they are already over. But as you 
would become my golden apples. learn  to  bring  your  attention  back  to  the  here  and  now, 
life  will  come  alive  again,  providing  the  enjoyment  and 
(C)
satisfaction  it  was  meant  to.  Thus,  when  you  live  in  the 
One  day  when  our  family  drove  into  town,  I  focused  present moment, one of the nice things that happens to you 
intently on the big, paper, grocery store signs advertising the  is that ordinary, everyday life takes on a new significance. 
same  type  of  produce  that  we  grew:  ‘carrots,  50  cents  a  Taking  walks,  watching  a  sunset,  gardening,  reading  a 
bunch,’ ‘tomatoes, 99 cents a pound.’ Meanwhile, I thought  book,  all  begin  to  feel  special.  When  your  attention  is 
of how the type of ‘imperfect’ produce we ate for dinner,  brought back to the here and now, you engage in life rather 
just as healthy as  that sold at the store, was often tossed  than think about life.
on the compost heap or left in the ground.
*compost heap: 퇴비 더미 49. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
(D) think about future events in your life
① 
concentrate better on the event at hand
The  unattractive  produce  such  as  crooked  carrots  and  ② 
compare even good experiences with others
odd-looking  tomatoes  was  not  valuable  to  the  grocery  ③ 
store, where only ‘perfect’ produce was sold. But I knew  ④  be totally satisfied with the ongoing event
they  would  have  value  to  people  who  would  chop  them  share the moment with your loved ones
⑤ 
into salads or soups, can them, or use them to make pies, 
because that is what our family did with them. They were 
50. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
fresh and clean and came straight from the good earth.
Living Today to the Fullest
① 
Traveling to Exotic Places
② 
(A)
46. 위 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장  What Are Friends for?
③ 
적절한 것은? Releasing Your Hidden Power
④ 
①  (B)-(C)-(D) ②  (B)-(D)-(C) ③  (C)-(B)-(D) ⑤  Creating Future-Oriented Attitudes
(C)-(D)-(B) (D)-(C)-(B)
④  ⑤ 
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
*  확인 사항
new friends family reunions
①  ② 
mass production farm reconstruction ◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
③  ④ 
complete independence 하시오.
⑤ 
8
8to recommend a Canadian professor
to give advice on some quiz items
to send the quiz items by e-mail
to buy books on geography
to advertise the quiz show
angry proud bored
sorrowful uninterested
to buy a dog to call Tom’s father
to visit Tom’s mother to play the piano
to ask Tom to study with her
$300 $350 $400 $450 $500Summer History Field Trip Mark Peter
Mark:____________________________________________
8 3 5
Hey, cheer up! Your mother is here to watch you.
Why didn’t you invite your mother to the competition?
150
Your mother has already left the swimming pool.
Peter, I didn’t know your mother is a good swimmer.
Congratulations! Finally, you beat your competitors.
This[this]
This is different from all other markets in that people
do not buy things here such as clothes, shoes, or cars.
Thanks to this, people can easily exchange one country’s
money with that of another. People desire to make such
exchanges for many reasons. Some are concerned with
the import or export of goods or services between one
country and another. Others wish to move capital from
one area to another. Still others may want to travel to a
Woman:__________________________________________
foreign country. This is incredibly important to the global
I didn’t know you already returned the books. economy. This gets influenced by a real world event, and
It’s good to hear that you’ve saved a lot. has an impact on the economy of a nation, causing the
Borrow the books instead of buying them. value of its money to rise and fall.
You have to be responsible for what you did.
I want to borrow some books from the library.
Man:____________________________________________ He[he]
You should have slept more than that.
I’m sorry, but I can’t help you out. Flying over rural Kansas in an airplane one fall evening
Yeah. You’re really a great help. was a delightful experience for passenger Walt Morris.
No, thanks. I’ve had enough coffee. He watched the twinkling farmhouse lights below.
Don’t worry! Just go to see a doctor. Suddenly, the peace of the evening was broken when the
plane’s landing lights started flashing on and off. ‘What’s
happening?’ he wondered as he gripped the armrests.
As the pilot was about to make an announcement, he
thought, ‘This is it. He’s going to tell us we’ve got a
Woman:___________________________________________
major problem.’ Instead, he told the passengers, “In
Sure. That’s why I want to wear these clothes longer.
case you’re worried about the flashing lights outside the
OK. I’ll go to the store and ask for a refund.
plane, I’m sending a signal to my kids.” He was
Certainly. I won’t buy second-hand items again. relieved to hear the continued announcement: “They’re at
You’re right. I’d like to take these clothes to the store. home over on that hill to the left, and they just sent me
That’s true. I’m not making the profit I expected. a Morse code message saying, ‘Good night, Dad.’”If you are worrying about money when you are away, Roman doll-makers continued to use technology
your enjoyment will suffer. Plan your budget in advance developed by the Egyptians and Greeks, but in line with
to give yourself time to research the costs fully. If you the artistic sensibilities of their culture, they were
constantly trying to make dolls more elegant and
cannot get confirmed prices, get as many estimates as you
beautiful. One doll, found near Prati in Rome, was
can. Note the best price and the worst price and budget
made of ivory and lay beside her owner who had died at the
in between the two. Ideally, the budgeted figures will
age of eighteen. The huge growth in the understanding
work out just about right. If they don’t, you will have to
of civilization raised awareness of other important roles
use your emergency fund to cover basic expenses such as
of trade. Next to the doll was a small box, also made
food, transport, and accommodation, and there will be less
of ivory, containing tiny combs and a silver mirror.
money available for an unexpected situation that necessitates
The doll had rings on her fingers and held a tiny key,
a sudden change of plan. So, be sure to make your
which unlocked the box. Like children today, the
budget realistic, so that you can be confident that you
younger members of Roman civilization would have
will be able to pay for all aspects of the trip.
dressed and undressed their dolls, and decorated their hair
and fingers according to the latest fashions.
(A) (B) (C)
While the fine art object is valued because it is
Many social scientists have believed for some time
unique, it is also valued because it can be reproduced
(A) that/what birth order directly affects both personality
for . For example, Van Gogh’s paintings
and achievement in adult life. In fact, people have been
have been reproduced endlessly on posters, postcards,
using birth order to account for personality factors such
coffee mugs, and T-shirts. Ordinary consumers can own a
as an aggressive behavior or a passive temperament. One copy of the highly valued originals. Therefore, the value of
might say, “Oh, I’m the eldest of three sisters, so I can’t the original results not only from its uniqueness but from
help that I’m so overbearing,” or “I’m not very successful its being the source from which reproductions are made.
in business, because I’m the youngest child and thus less The manufacturers who produce art reproductions and the
(B) aggressively/aggressive than my older brothers and consumers who purchase and display them give value to
sisters.” Recent studies, however, have proved this belief the work of art by making it available to many people as
to be false. In other words, birth order may define your an item of popular culture.
role within a family, but as you mature into adulthood,
art education artists’ imagination
(C) accepted/accepting other social roles, birth order
cultural diversity scholarly research
becomes insignificant.
popular consumption
(A) (B) (C)
that aggressively accepting
that aggressive accepting
that aggressive accepted
what aggressive accepted There are some people who believe that no one should
be trusted. They usually feel this way because their
what aggressively accepted
behavior compels others to lie to them. In other words,
they make it difficult for others to tell them the truth
because they respond rudely or emotionally to people who
You may think that moving a short distance is so easy tell the truth. If others see how angry, hurt, or hateful you
that you can do it in no time with little effort. You may become when they tell you the truth, they will avoid telling
it to you at all costs. If you are known as someone who is
decide to use your own car because you think that you
easily offended, you will never know what others are really
don’t need the services of a moving company. Well, you
thinking or feeling because they will
might be wrong. You are under the false impression that
to escape from your negative reaction. If you demand that
you do not have as many items to pack as you really do.
children tell you the truth and then punish them because it
You find out too late that your car cannot carry as
is not very satisfying, you teach them to lie to you to
much as you thought it could. So, it takes you far more
protect themselves.
trips to your new home than you thought it would. There is
also the possibility of damage your stuff, some of it protect their children distort the truth
valuable. All these things considered, it might be better waste your expenses hurt your feelings
to ask for the services of a moving company. reveal their angerOne of the main principles I follow when I draw outside (A) (B) (C)
is . I try to stay away hesitancy distribution optimistic
from houses or barns that have unusual angles of the roof, hesitancy distribution skeptical
or objects that look incorrect in size, perspective, or design. hesitancy description optimistic
If the subject is confusing when you look at it, it will be consistency description optimistic
more confusing when you attempt to draw it. I know a consistency distribution skeptical
beautiful barn where the corners are not at right angles. No
matter how many times I have drawn it, the perspective does
not look right. If I were to make an accurate drawing of this
barn and put it in a show, I’m sure I would get all kinds of
criticism for my poor perspective. I would not be there to
tell my critics that the barn is actually constructed this way.
So, I stay away from subjects that do not look right to me.
not to select a subject that is too difficult or odd
not to draw any objects that others have drawn
to draw an object with imagination
to get information from abstract subjects
to convert inaccurate drawings into accurate ones
When faced with things that are too big to sense, we
comprehend them by .
The first appearance of a shining star in a darkening A violin creates tension in its strings and gives each
evening sky can take you out into the universe if you of them an equilibrium shape: a straight line. A tight
combine what you see with the twin facts that the star is violin string can be viewed as composed of many
merely one of the closest of the galaxy’s 200 billion stars individual pieces that are connected in a chain as in the
and that its light began traveling decades ago. The smell of above two figures. When the string is straight, as in
gasoline going into a car’s tank during a refueling stop, Figure 1, its tension is uniform, and the two outward
when combined with the fact that each day nearly a billion forces on a given piece sum to zero; they have equal
gallons of crude oil are refined and used in the United magnitudes and point in opposite directions. With no
States, can allow our imagination to spread outward into the net forces acting on its pieces, the string is in equilibrium.
vast global network of energy trade and politics. [ ] But when the string is curved, as in Figure 2, the
*crude oil: outward forces on its pieces no longer sum to zero.
establishing the local network Although the string’s uniform tension still gives those
understanding the energy policy of a nation outward forces equal magnitudes, they now point in
comparing the universe with human beings slightly different directions, and each piece experiences a
associating the objects with their names zero net force. The net forces on its pieces are
adding knowledge to the experience restoring forces, which will cause the string to vibrate
and thus make sounds.
(A) (B) (C) *equilibrium: ** magnitude:
The first experiments in television broadcasting began
in France in the 1930s, but the French were slow to ‘She’
employ the new technology. There were several reasons
Her nerves were hurting her. She looked automatically
for this (A) hesitancy/consistency. Radio absorbed the
again at the high, uncurtained windows. As night fell, she
majority of state resources, and the French government
could just perceive outside a huge tree swinging its
was reluctant to shoulder the financial burden of developing
branches. The rain came flying on the window. Ah, why
national networks for television broadcasting. Television
didn’t she have peace? These two men, her husband and
programming costs were too high, and program output
her son, why did they not come? She wrapped a large
correspondingly low. Poor (B) distribution/description
scarf around her and hesitated for a moment. She opened
combined with minimal offerings provided little incentive
the door and stepped out into the backyard. There was no
to purchase the new product. Further, television sets were
sign of a light anywhere. She listened with all her ears
priced beyond the means of a general public whose
but could hear nothing but the night. “James! Shawn!”
modest living standards, especially in the 1930s and
she called, but nothing came from the darkness.
1940s, did not allow the acquisition of luxury goods.
Ideological influences also factored in; elites in particular nervous and worried relaxed and comfortable
were (C) optimistic / skeptical of television, perceiving safe and relieved satisfied and pleased
it as a messenger of mass culture and Americanization. cold and indifferent(A) (B) significance of geography in understanding history
effects of the Nile River on Egyptian farming
Sheets of paper exist almost entirely for the purpose of
differences between geography and geology
carrying information, so we tend to think of them as
varieties of Egyptian civilization
neutral objects. We rarely interpret marks on paper as
development of Egyptian culture
references to the paper itself. (A) , when we see the
text, characters, and images on artifacts that serve other
purposes, we generally interpret these marks as labels that
do refer to their carriers. Natural objects do not come with
labels, of course, but these days, most physical artifacts
Nowadays, we can enjoy athletic competition of every
do. (B) , their designers have chosen to shift part of
kind without leaving our homes. It is the fun that comes
the burden of communication from the form and materials
from cheering on our team and celebrating its skills
of the artifact itself to lightweight surface symbols. So, for
while complaining about the opposing team’s good luck.
example, a designer of door handles might not worry about
But some individuals sit and watch a football game or
communicating their functions through their shapes, but
tennis match without cheering for anyone or any team.
might simply mark them ‘push’ and ‘pull.’
They are not willing to risk the possible disappointment
*artifact:
of picking the loser, so they give up the possible joy of
(A) (B) picking the winner. They live in the world of neutrality.
However Otherwise Don’t be one of them. Sure, your team might lose. But
Likewise In contrast then again, your team might win. Either way, your
However That is spectator experience will have been a fun one, and you
Besides In contrast will have avoided being merely a passive observer.
Besides That is
Many people believe that they will be free of their
anger if they express it, and that their tears will release
their pain. This belief derives from a nineteenth-century
understanding of emotions, and it is no truer than the flat
earth. It sees the brain as a steam kettle in which negative
feelings build up pressure. But no psychologist has ever
succeeded in proving the unburdening effects of the
supposed safety valves of tears and anger. On the contrary,
over forty years ago, controlled studies showed that fits of
anger are more likely to intensify anger, and that tears can
drive us still deeper into depression. Our heads do not
resemble steam kettles, and our brains involve a much
more complicated system than can be accounted for by
images taken from nineteenth-century technology.
19
Knowing when something happened is important.
Understanding why historic events took place is also The above graph shows changes in school enrollment
important. To do this, historians often turn to geography. rates of the population ages 3 19 by age group from
Weather patterns, the water supply, and the landscape of a 1970 to 2006. The enrollment rates of all age groups
place all affect the lives of the people who live there. For were higher than 50 percent in 2006. Of all age
example, to explain why the ancient Egyptians developed groups, the enrollment rate for youth ages 7 13 was the
a successful civilization, you must look at the geography highest during the entire period covered by the graph.
of Egypt. Egyptian civilization was built on the banks of Of all age groups, the enrollment rate of children
the Nile River, which flooded each year, depositing soil ages 5 6 increased the most from 1970 to 2006. The
on its banks. The rich soil could help farmers grow overall change in the enrollment rate from 1980 to 1990
enough crops to feed the people in the cities. That meant was smaller for youth ages 14 17 than for youth ages
everyone did not have to farm, so some people could 18 19. The lowest enrollment rate is seen in children
perform other jobs that helped develop the civilization. ages 3 4 among all age groups for each year.RPC
The RPC, founded in 1996, describes itself as a
progressive organization fighting for social change. It is a
multiracial, multi-issue, international membership organization.
Its mission is to move the nation and the world towards
social, racial, and economic justice. It has its headquarters
in Chicago, and major branches in Washington, D.C.,
New York, and Los Angeles. It has succeeded in registering
The specific combinations of foods in a cuisine and
hundreds of thousands of voters, helped elect many
the ways they are prepared constitute a deep reservoir of
officials, mediated labor disputes, affected public policy
accumulated wisdom about diet and health and place. In
in Haiti, and helped secure professional positions for
Latin America, for example, corn is traditionally eaten
minorities in a number of different fields. It also works
with beans; each plant is deficient in an essential amino
on issues such as fair housing, gender equality, and
acid that happens to be abundant in the other, so together
environmental justice.
corn and beans form a balanced diet in the absence of
1996 meat. Similarly, corn in Latin America is traditionally
ground or soaked with limestone, which makes available
a B vitamin in the corn, the absence of which would
otherwise lead to a deficiency disease. Very often, when
Haiti
a society adopts a new food without the food culture
surrounding it, as happened when corn first came to
Europe, Africa, and Asia, people get sick. The context in
sacred lotus which a food is eaten can be nearly as important as the
food itself.
A water plant called the sacred lotus regulates its
*limestone:
temperature in order to benefit insects that it needs to
reproduce. When the plant flowers, it heats its blossoms
to above 86 for as long as four days. It does so, even
when the air is as cool as 50 . The heat releases an
aroma that attracts certain insects, which fly into the
flower to feed on nectar and pollen. But according to
Roger Seymour and Paul Schultze-Motel of Australia’s
University of Adelaide, the heat does more: It rewards
insects with a stable environment that enhances their
ability to eat, mate, and prepare for flight.
*nectar: ( ) **pollen:
Now many kinds of superior coffee beans are
being decaffeinated in ways that conserve strong
86
flavor. But the public suffers from a groundless fear
50
of chemical decaffeination and prefers instead to buy
water-processed decaf.
(A) The solvent comes into direct contact with them, carrying
the caffeine with it. The drained solvent is then mixed
with water, and the caffeine is drawn out to be sold.
Old Hawk gestured up at the tall, old cottonwood. It
(B) In the water process, however, no solvent touches the
was so large that a grown man could not put his arms
beans. After the beans are steamed, they are soaked in
around it. “This tree,” he said, “has stood guard over our
water, which removes the caffeine along with all the
family all its life. Strength is what I feel each time I
soluble solids in the beans. The solution is drained off to
look at it. Yet, there have been moments when its great
a separate tank, where the caffeine is drawn out from it.
strength was also its weakness.” “That’s hard to believe,”
Jeremy said. “It’s the biggest tree for miles around.” Old (C) Every process of decaffeination, whether chemical- or
Hawk pointed at the chokecherry trees in a dry river bed water-based, starts with steaming the green beans to
not far away. “Look there,” he said, “those chokecherry loosen the bonds of caffeine. In the chemical process, a
trees are small and weak in comparison to this cottonwood. solvent circulates through the beans.
But when you were a child, they survived a storm *solvent:
without losing a branch. This old cottonwood, on the
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C)
other hand, lost several branches. It stood up to the
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
storm, but it could not bend with the wind the way the
chokecherry trees could.” (C) (B) (A)Processing a TV message is much more like the
all-at-once processing of the ear than the linear
One grandmother hires her grandchildren to help with
processing of the eye reading a printed page. According
gardening chores.
to McLuhan, television is fundamentally an acoustic
medium. To make this point clear, he invited people to
Whether their grandchildren have special needs or not,
try a simple experiment. First, turn the sound down on
grandparents shouldn’t overlook the value of incidental
the TV set for one minute during your favorite program.
learning experiences. ( ) Every day, opportunities
Now, for another minute, adjust the TV set so that you
exist in the form of errands, meal preparation, and
can hear the sound but you cant see any picture. Which
chores. ( ) At the farmers’ market, for example, a
condition was more frustrating? Which condition gave
child might discover a new meaning for the word ‘ears’
you less information? McLuhan believed that people who
when choosing corn. ( ) Similarly, when filling the
tried this little exercise would invariably report more
tank at the gas station, older children can compare prices
frustration in the condition where the picture was visible
and practice estimation, asking questions such as “How
but the sound was inaudible.
much do you think it will cost to fill the tank?” ( )
TV Messages: More Visual or Acoustic?
As a result, they can learn the names of flowers and
Surveys of Favorite TV Programs
understand the tools and processes involved in growing
TV as Efficient Equipment for the Deaf
vegetables. ( ) Activities like these also enhance the
Effects of Advertisements on TV Viewers
value of hard work and persistence.
More Frustrating Conditions: Invisible Situations
Most people have a vase or two in a cupboard, but lots
of things can be turned into stylish containers for a flower
(A)
arrangement, so before you rush out to buy anything, look
(B)
around your own home. For instance, goldfish bowls look
stunning filled with flower heads or petals, magnifying
Everywhere in the world, the issue of how to manage
their contents. Wine, milk, mineral water, or olive oil
urban growth poses the highest stakes, complex policy
bottles look particularly good with one or two stems in
decisions, and strongly heated conflicts in the public
them. Try a collection of bottles in various shapes and
area. The contrast between Western Europe and America
sizes, lined up on a shelf or grouped on a table. An old
is particularly sharp. In Western Europe, steep gasoline
teapot which has lost its lid becomes an ideal container for
taxes, investment policies favoring built-up areas over
a bunch of roses picked from the garden.
undeveloped greenfields, continuous investment in public
Flower Arrangements and Gardening transportation, and other policies have produced relatively
Tips for Planting Flowers in the Garden compact cities. Cities in Western Europe tend to be
Decorating a Dining Table with Various Plants economically healthy compared with their suburbs. By
Color: The Starting Point for Decoration contrast, in the United States, cheap gas, massive
Ordinary Things as Flower Containers highway investment, policies that favor construction on
the edges of cities, and heavy reliance on property taxes
to fund public schools have encouraged much more
car-reliant and spread-out urban areas, where eight in ten
In Pamplona, a white-walled, sun-baked town high up
Americans now live.
in the hills of Navarre, is held in the first two weeks of
*stake:
July each year the World’s Series of bull fighting. The
cafes under the wide arcades that run around the Plaza
de la Constitucion have every table crowded. All day and
Different (A) resulted in relatively (B)
all night there is dancing in the street. Bands of
cities in Western Europe but resulted in spread-out urban
blue-shirted farmers circle and lift and swing behind a
areas in the United States.
drum and various wind instruments in the ancient Basque
Riau-Riau dances. And at night there is the beat of the
(A) (B)
big drums and the military band as the whole town
public policies centralized
dances in the great open square of the Plaza.
transportation systems decentralized
sad and desperate urgent and scary market demands decentralized
merry and festive gloomy and miserable tax systems decentralized
calm and peaceful economic capacities centralized(a) (e) ‘I’
(A) One Saturday during the summer, I asked my
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
father if he would go down to the schoolyard and play
basketball with me. I had just finished the fifth grade,
and wanted desperately to make the middle school team
the coming fall. (a)I couldn’t believe my ears when he
called for my mother and sister to come along, for, in
Some scientists have shown the practical power of
the traditional fashion, my mother was the house
looking at the world through ‘could-be’ eyes. When a
accountant, the launderer, and, of course, the cook.
group of students were shown an unfamiliar rubbery
(B) She turned from the basket and began heading the
object and told, “This could be a dog’s chewy toy,”
other way. (b)“Um-mah,” I cried at her, my irritation
they were later able to see that it might also be of use
already bubbling over, “the basket’s over here!” After a
as an eraser when they made some pencil mistakes. In
few steps she turned around, and from where the
contrast, students who were told that it was a dog’s
professional three-point line must be now, she
chewy toy did not find its alternative use.
effortlessly flipped the ball up in the air, its flight truer
Another group of students watched a video about
and higher than I’d witnessed from any boy or man.
physics after being told, “This presents only one of
The ball curved cleanly into the basket, stiffly popping
several outlooks on physics. Please feel free to use any
the chain-link net. All afternoon, she rained in shot after
additional methods you want to assist you in solving the
shot, as my father and I ran after her.
problems.” On tests of factual comprehension, these
(C) When we got home from the playground, my students performed no differently from students who had
mother showed me the photograph album of her high watched the video with a different introduction: “This
school days. I was shocked to learn that she had been presents the outlook on physics. Please use the method
the top player for the national high school team that you see in the video in solving the problems.” But
once won the all-Asia championships. (c)For years I when they were faced with questions that asked them to
kept it in my room, on the same shelf that housed the use the information more creatively, the ‘could-be’
scrapbooks I made of basketball stars, with magazine students performed much better than the others. Just a
clippings of great players such as Bubbles Hawkins, simple of language seemed to invite the
Pistol Pete, and George Gervin. students to process and store information in a much
more flexible format, and thus be able to look at it and
(D) When we arrived, my sister immediately ran off
make use of it in different ways.
to the swings, and (d)I recall being annoyed that my
mother wasn’t following her. I dribbled awkwardly
around the free-throw line, almost losing control of the ‘could-be’eyes
ball, and made a flat shot that bounced wildly off the
basket. The ball fell to my father, who took a few not
so graceful dribbles and missed an easy layup. (e)He
rebounded his shot and passed the ball to my mother,
who had been watching us from the foul line.
*layup: ( )
memory criticism
definition imitation
(A)
change
(B) (D) (C) (C) (B) (D)
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C)
(D) (C) (B)
‘I’
‘I’
‘I’
‘I’
‘I’제 3 교시
    
2011학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
홀수형
성명 수험 번호 ―
                   
    
○ 문제지의 해당란에 성명과 수험 번호를 정확히 쓰시오.
○ 답안지의  해당란에  성명과  수험  번호를  쓰고,  또  수험  번호,  문형
(홀수/짝수), 답을 정확히 표시하시오.
○ 문항에 따라 배점이 다르니, 각 물음의 끝에 표시된 배점을 참고하시오. 
1점과  3점  문항에만  점수가  표시되어  있습니다.  점수  표시가  없는 
문항은 모두 2점입니다.
※ 시험이 시작되기 전까지 표지를 넘기지 마시오.
한국교육과정평가원1
2011학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
제 3 교시
홀수형
7. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 
고르시오.
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
to repair his broken computer
① 
to install an ad blocking program
② 
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 구입할 자전거를 고르시오. 
to place a pop-up ad on a website
③ 
① ② ③ to help him block spam text messages
④ 
to let him know the name of a program
⑤ 
8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 
곳을 고르시오. 
④ ⑤ ①  농구 경기장 ②  권투 시합장 ③  빙상 경기장
④  실내 수영장 ⑤  육상 경기장
9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
①  은행 직원 ―  고객
②  의사 ―  간호사 
③  경찰관 ―  보행자 
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
④  아파트 경비원 ―  방문객
scared delighted encouraged
①  ②  ③  ⑤  매표소 직원 ―  관람객
annoyed sympathetic
④  ⑤ 
10. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
3. 다음을  듣고,  남자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을 
①  꽃 사러 가기 ②  놀이공원 가기
고르시오.
③  졸업식 참석하기 ④  쇼핑몰 구경하기
①  연령에 따른 성격의 변화 ⑤  전자사전 구입하기
②  나쁜 잠버릇을 고치는 방법
③  타고난 기질이 안 바뀌는 이유
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 방문할 박물관을 
④  수면 자세와 성격 간의 관련성
고르시오.
⑤  혈액형과 성격 간의 연관 가능성
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오. ①
①  세차 도와주기 ②  버스 기사에게 전화하기
②
③  휴대전화 수리 맡기기 ④  터미널 휴게실 청소하기
⑤  차량 운행 시간 알려 주기 ③
④
5. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 주문한 물건 값으로 한 달에 지불할 금액을 
고르시오.  [3점]
⑤
$60 $120 $250 $360 $400
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
The Walk of Harmony
12. 에 관한 다음 내용을 듣고,  일치하지 
6. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을 
않는  것을 고르시오. 
고르시오.
4 10
①  월  일 토요일에 개최될 예정이다.
①  음식물 보관 방법을 설명하려고
②  다문화 가정에 대한 인식을 높이기 위한 행사이다. 
②  기금 마련 바자회를 홍보하려고
③  비가 올 경우에는 행사가 취소된다. 
③  학생들의 기부 참여를 독려하려고 
8
④  피자 파티의 일정 변경을 알리려고 ④  세 미만의 아동은 어른이 꼭 동반해야 한다. 
⑤  양로원 자원 봉사 활동을 안내하려고  ⑤  참가 신청서는 웹 사이트에서 내려 받을 수 있다.
1
82 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점] 18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
My  wife  and  I  have  enjoyed  receiving  your  publication 
for years. Unfortunately, our jobs now have us both traveling 
most  weeks,  and  we  simply  cannot  keep  up  with  a  daily 
paper. So we would like to request that you stop delivery 
to our home. If you have questions about this matter, please 
leave a message at (212)555-5612, and either my wife or 
I  will  call  you  back  as  soon  as  we  can.  Thank  you  for 
years  of  reliable  delivery  of  a  first-rate  newspaper.  If  our 
situation  changes,  we  will  call  you  to  resume  delivery.  In 
the meantime, we will expect delivery to stop no later than 
the end of this week.
①  여행 동행 제안을 거절하려고
①                  ②                  ③                  ④                  ⑤ ②  신문 배달 중단을 요청하려고
③  출판 일정에 대해 문의하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
④  변경된 전화번호를 안내하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오.
⑤  신속한 정정 보도에 감사하려고
Man:  
                                                                                                 
①  I’m here to buy a suit for my concert. 19. 밑줄 친 she[her]가 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
I’ll tell you who’s available by tomorrow.
②  Kate  and  Joan,  who  had  not  seen  each  other  for  three 
I hope you’re feeling better from the flu.
③  months,  were  chatting  happily  in  Joan’s  apartment.  After 
I think we should put on the show right now.
④ 
a  short  conversation,  Joan  went  to  prepare  coffee.  Soon 
I want to thank you for finding a replacement.
⑤ 
she came back with the cups and saucers and put them 
①
down  on  a  small  side  table.  While  Joan  was  looking  for 
15. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장 
a tablecloth, Kate was wandering around the room looking 
적절한 것을 고르시오. 
at the pictures on the walls. Intent on one of the pictures, 
Woman:                                                
she took a step back and hit the small table, tipping it 
②
I’m not interested in those club activities.
① 
over.  All  the  cups  and  saucers  were  broken.  Kate  felt 
This rock concert is sure to be a big success.
② 
guilty for her negligence. As she helped Joan clean up, 
My dream is to be the world chess champion. ③
③ 
she  tried  to  think  of  a  way  to  compensate  her  for  the 
That’s a great way to play musical instruments. ④
④ 
damage.  Later,  Joan  mentioned  that  she  was  looking  for 
If you make them, I’ll help you post them up.
⑤ 
volunteers  to  work  in  a  fair  she  was  organizing.  Although 
Kate  had  something  important  to  do  on  that  particular 
16. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장 
Sunday,  she  decided  to  cancel  her  plans  and  volunteer 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  ⑤
Man:   to help Joan.
                                                                                                 
Don’t fix what isn’t broken.
① 
I’d move mountains for you. 20. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은?
② 
It’s better to be safe than sorry. 
③  The word ‘courage’ takes on added meaning if you keep in 
You can’t please the whole world.
④  mind that it is derived from the Latin word ‘cor’  meaning 
①
Time flies when you’re having fun. 
⑤  ‘heart.’ The dictionary defines courage as a ‘quality which 
enables  one  to  pursue  a  right  course  of  action, through  
Amy
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가 택시 기사에게 할 말로 가장 
which one may provoke disapproval, hostility, or contempt.’ 
②
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Over 300 years ago La Rochefoucauld went a step further 
Amy:                                                                                  
when he said: “Perfect courage is to do unwitnessed what 
Could you let me off here?
①  we  should  be  capable  of  doing  before  all  men.”  It  is  not 
Does this taxi go to N Seoul Tower?
②  easy to  show  moral  courage  in  the  face  of  either 
③
Is there a shortcut to Gyeongbokgung?
③  indifference  or  opposition.  But  persons  who  are  daring  in 
How long does it take to get to the market?
④  taking  a  wholehearted  stand  for  truth  often  achieving 
④
Can you recommend a place to visit in Seoul?
⑤ 
results  that  surpass  their  expectations.  On  the  other  hand, 
halfhearted individuals are seldom distinguished for courage 
even when it involves their own welfare. To be courageous 
⑤
  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지의 
under all circumstances requires strong determination.
지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다.
*provoke: 유발하다
2
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 33
(A), (B), (C)
21. 의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장  [24～29] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
적절한 것은?
24. In a classic set of studies over a ten-year period, biologist 
We  anticipate  the  future  as  if  we  found  it  too  slow  in  Gerald Wilkinson found that, when vampire bats return to 
coming and we were trying to hurry it up. (A) So/Such  their communal nests from a successful night’s foraging, they 
imprudent  are  we  that  we  wander  about  in  times  that  frequently vomit blood and share it with other nest-mates, 
are  not  ours  and  do  not  think  of  the  one  that  belongs  including even non-relatives. The reason, it turns out, is that 
to  us.  We  try  to  support  the  present  with  the  future  blood-sharing greatly improves each bat’s chances of survival. 
and  (B) think / thinking  of  arranging  things  we  cannot  A  bat  that  fails  to  feed  for  two  nights  is  likely  to  die. 
Wilkinson showed that the blood donors are typically sharing 
control,  for  a  time  we  have  no  certainty  of  reaching. 
their  surpluses  and,  in  so  doing,  are  saving  unsuccessful 
Examine  your  thoughts,  and  you  will  find  them  wholly 
foragers  that  are  close  to  starvation.  So  the  costs  are 
(C) to  occupy/occupied  with  the  past  or  the  future.  We 
relatively low and the benefits are relatively high. Since no 
almost  never  think  of  the  present,  and  if  we  do  so,  it  is 
bat can be certain of success on any given night, it is likely 
only  to  shed  light  on  our  plans  for  the  future.  The  past 
that  the  donor  will  itself  eventually  need  help  from  some 
and the present are our means; only the future is our end.
nest-mate. In effect, the vampire bats have created a kind 
(A) (B) (C) of                                       .              *forage: 먹이를 찾아다니다
① So …… thinking …… occupied ① complex social hierarchy ② ecological diversity
So think to occupy mutual insurance system parasitic relationship
②  …… …… ③  ④ 
So think occupied effective reproduction process
③  …… …… ⑤ 
Such thinking occupied
④ …… ……
Such thinking to occupy
⑤ …… …… 25. One of the little understood paradoxes in communication 
is  that  the  more  difficult  the  word,  the  shorter  the 
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은? explanation. The more meaning you can pack into a single 
Consider  the  following  implication involving the role of  word, the fewer words are needed to get the idea across. Big 
social bonds and affection among group members. If strong  words are resented by persons who don’t understand them 
and,  of  course,  very  often  they  are  used  to  confuse  and 
bonds make even a single dissent less likely, the performance 
impress  rather  than  clarify.  But  this  is  not  the  fault  of 
of groups and institutions will be impaired. A study of 
①
language; it is the arrogance of the individual who misuses 
investment  clubs  showed  that  the  worst-performing  clubs 
the tools of communication. The best reason for acquiring a 
were built on affective ties and were primarily social, while 
large vocabulary is that                            . A genuinely 
the  best-performing  clubs  limited  social  connections  and 
educated person can express himself tersely and trimly. For 
focused on making money. Dissent was far more frequent 
② example, if you don’t know, or use, the word ‘imbricate,’ 
in the high-performing clubs. The low performers  usually 
③ you have to say to someone, ‘having the edges overlapping 
voted unanimously, with little open debate. As illustrated 
④ in  a  regular  arrangement  like  tiles  on  a  roof,  scales  on  a 
in the study, the high performers placed more importance on 
fish, or sepals on a plant.’ More than 20 words to say what 
social bonds than the low performers, resulting in their high  can be said in one.
rate of success. The central problem  is  that  the  voters  in 
⑤ it keeps you from being long-winded
① 
low-performing groups were trying to build social cohesion 
you can avoid critical misunderstandings
② 
rather than to produce the highest returns. 
it enables you to hide your true intentions
③ 
it makes you express yourself more impressively
④ 
23. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은? ⑤  you can use an easy word instead of a difficult one
I have always taught my children that politeness, learning, 
and order are good things, and that something good is to be 
26. So far as you are wholly concentrated on bringing about 
desired and developed for its own sake. But at school they 
a certain result, clearly the quicker and easier it is brought 
learned,  and  very  quickly,  that  children  earn  Nature  Trail 
about  the  better.  Your  resolve  to  secure  a  sufficiency  of 
tickets  for  running  the  quarter-mile  track  during  lunch  food for yourself and your family will induce you to spend 
recess.  Or  Lincoln  Dollars  for  picking  up  trash  on  the  weary days in tilling the ground and tending livestock; but 
playground or for helping a young child find the bathroom if  Nature  provided  food  and  meat  in  abundance  ready  for 
deeds that used to be called ‘good citizenship.’ Why is  the  table,  you  would  thank  Nature  for  sparing  you  much 
―
it necessary to buy the minimal cooperation of children with  labor  and  consider  yourself  so  much  the  better  off.  An 
rewards and treats? What disturbs me is the idea that good  executed purpose, in short, is a transaction in which the time 
and energy spent on the execution are balanced against the 
behavior must be reinforced with incentives. Children must 
resulting  assets,  and  the  ideal  case  is  one  in  which 
be taught to perform good deeds for their own sake, not in             
. Purpose, then, justifies the 
order to receive stickers, stars, and candy bars.                                                            
efforts it exacts only conditionally, by their fruits. 
[3점]
①  남을 배려하는 마음을 갖도록 아이들을 가르쳐야 한다. demand exceeds supply, resulting in greater returns
① 
②  아이들이 서로 협력할 수 있도록 분위기를 조성해야 한다. life becomes fruitful with our endless pursuit of dreams
② 
③ 잘못된 행동을 할지라도 아이들을 무조건 혼내지 말아야 한다. the time and energy are limitless and assets are abundant
③
④ 아이들이 보상 없이도 바람직한 행동을 하도록 가르쳐야 한다. ④ Nature does not reward those who do not exert efforts
the former approximates to zero and the latter to infinity
⑤ 아이들이 바른 시민으로 성장할 수 있도록 모범을 보여야 한다. ⑤
3
84 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
27. Psychologist Solomon Asch wanted to discover whether  30. 다음 글에 드러난 Jess의 심경 변화로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점]
people’s  tendency  to  agree  with  their  peers  was  stronger 
Jess  took  another  step  forward.  The  ground  fell  with 
than their tendency toward independent thought and rational 
unexpected sharpness, and the water level seemed to jump 
judgment.  Asch  assembled  groups  of  twelve  university 
from her knees to her waist. She stopped for a moment and 
students  and  announced  that  they  were  taking  part  in  an 
anxiously scanned the river before her. Her legs started to 
experiment on visual perception. He showed them three line 
shake  and  she  felt  her  body  stiffen.  And  this  was  an 
segments, and asked each one in turn which line was the  unknown river. There could be reeds, or other dangers she 
longest.  It  was  an  easy  task  and  the  correct  answer  was  didn’t  know  about.  She  was  concerned  that  as  a  townie, 
obvious. However, Asch had secretly instructed all but the  she’d had little experience of the countryside, and none at 
last person in each group, who was the real subject of the  all of swimming in rivers. It didn’t look safe enough but she 
experiment,  to  say  that  the  medium-length  line  was  the  didn’t want to turn back. She took a deep breath and pushed 
longest. As it turned out, over 70 percent of the real subjects   herself into the water. It felt nice and cool, not as freezing 
                         and said that the medium-length  as when she had first stepped into it. The water seemed to 
 
line was the longest. welcome  and  embrace  her.  She  liked  the  clean,  luxuriant 
feeling as she swept down with the current. 
caved in to group pressure
① 
figured out the correct answer bored amused worried pleased
②  ①  → ②  →
had problems with their vision joyous terrified excited sorrowful
③  ③  → ④  →
roped the other group members in afraid disappointed
④  ⑤  →
used rational judgment in their decision-making
⑤ 
(A),  (B),  (C)
31. 의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장 
28. Journeys  are  the  midwives  of  thought.  Few  places  are  적절한 것은?
more conducive to internal conversations than a moving plane,  Contrary to what we usually believe, the best moments in 
ship, or train. There is an almost peculiar correlation between  our  lives  are  not  the  passive,  receptive,  relaxing  times―
what is in front of our eyes and the thoughts we are able to  although such experiences can also be enjoyable, if we have 
have  in  our  heads:  large  thoughts  at  times  requiring  large  worked hard to (A) attain/avoid them. The best moments 
usually occur when a person’s body or mind is stretched to 
views,  new  thoughts  new  places.  Introspective  reflections 
its  limits  in  a  voluntary  effort  to  accomplish  something 
which are liable to stall are helped along by the flow of the 
landscape. The mind                       when thinking  difficult and worthwhile. (B) Optimal/Minimal experience 
is thus something that we make happen. For a child, it could 
is all it is supposed to do. The task can be as paralyzing as 
be placing with trembling fingers the last block on a tower she 
having to tell a joke or mimic an accent on demand. Thinking 
has built, higher than any she has built so far; for a sprinter, 
improves when parts of the mind are given other tasks, are 
it  could  be  trying  to  beat  his  own  record;  for  a  violinist, 
charged with listening to music or following a line of trees. 
mastering  an (C) uncomplicated/intricate musical  passage. 
may be reluctant to think properly
①  For each person there are thousands of opportunities, challenges 
may focus better on future thoughts 
②  to  expand  ourselves.
can become confused by multitasking
③ 
(A) (B) (C)
is likely to be paralyzed by fear of new tasks
④ 
attain Minimal uncomplicated
can be distracted from what is before the eyes ① …… ……
⑤ 
attain Optimal intricate
②  …… ……
attain Optimal uncomplicated
③  …… ……
29. It is a fundamental mistake to imagine that when we see  avoid Optimal intricate
④ …… ……
the non-value in a value or the untruth in a truth, the value 
avoid Minimal uncomplicated
⑤ …… ……
or  the  truth  ceases  to  exist.  It  has  only  become  relative. 
Everything human is relative, because everything rests on 
32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
an inner polarity; for everything is a phenomenon of energy. 
않은  것은?
Energy necessarily depends on a pre-existing polarity, without 
Many people take numerous photos while traveling or on 
which there could be no energy. There must always be high 
vacation or during significant life celebrations to preserve 
and  low,  hot  and  cold,  etc.,  so  that  the  equilibrating  ①
the experience for the future. But the role of photographer 
process   which is energy can take place. Therefore the 
― ―
may  actually  detract  from  their delight  in  the  present 
tendency  to  deny  all  previous  values  in  favor  of  their  ②
moment. I know a father who devoted himself earnestly to 
opposites is just                               . And in so 
photographing  the  birth  of  his  first  and  only  child.  The 
far as it is a question of rejecting universally accepted and 
photos were beautiful but, he lamented afterward he felt 
indubitable values, the result is a fatal loss.  ③
[3점]
that he had missed out on the most important first moment 
①  another way of pursuing relativeness in human affairs of his son’s life. Looking through the camera lens made him 
②  as desirable as the tendency to accept all those values ④detached from the scene. He was just an observer, not an 
as much of an exaggeration as the earlier onesidedness experiencer.  Teach  yourself  to  use  your  camera  in  a  way 
③
the one and only way of approaching the ultimate truth that neglects your ongoing experiences, by truly looking 
④ ⑤
to admit the presence of energy derived from an inner polarity at things and noticing what is beautiful and meaningful.
⑤
4
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 55
(A), (B) effects of habitat reduction on climate change
33. 다음 글의 빈칸  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? ① 
the shrinkage of habitats and its consequences
No  matter  how  good  your  product  is,  remember  that  ② 
the importance of forests and coastal wetlands
perfection of an existing product is not necessarily the best  ③ 
investment one can make. (A) , the Erie Canal, which  ④  the relationship between types of habitats and species
took  four  years  to  build,  was  regarded  as  the  height  of  ⑤ ways to preserve natural habitats for endangered species
efficiency in its day. What its builders had not considered 
was that the advent of the railroad would assure the canal’s 
instant  downfall.  By  the  time  the  canal  was  finished,  the 
railroad  had  been  established  as  the  fittest  technology  for 
36. 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 것은?
transportation. (B) , when  the  fuel  cell  becomes  the 
Around  350  B.C.  there  lived  in  Greece  a  very  famous 
automotive engine of choice, the car companies focusing on 
painter  named  Apelles.  It  was  his  practice  to  conceal 
increasing the efficiency of the internal combustion engine 
himself  at  previews  of  his  paintings  in  order  to  hear  the 
may find themselves left behind. Is it time to keep making 
public’s opinions of his masterpieces. At one such preview 
what you are making? Or is it time to create a new niche? 
a  bootmaker  criticized  the  shoes  in  a  painting  on  which 
Innovation  requires  noticing  signals  outside  the  company 
Apelles  had  labored  long  and  hard.  After  correcting  the 
itself:  signals  in  the  community,  the  environment,  and  the 
picture  the  painter  arranged  a  second  preview.  This  time 
world  at  large.                                                       *niche: 틈새 the bootmaker began to criticize the anatomy of one of the 
(A) (B) characters.  Apelles  was  unable  to  restrain  himself,  for  he 
Furthermore Nevertheless knew  that  the  criticism  was  unjust  and  the  man  knew 
① ……
Furthermore Otherwise nothing  about  anatomy.  From  his  hiding  place  Apelles 
②  ……
For example Likewise shouted, “Bootmaker, stick to your last!” From that time it 
③  ……
For example However has  been  the  custom  to  ridicule  the  people  who  act  like 
④ ……
⑤ In contrast …… Besides they  know  what  they  do  not  with  the  pointed  caution, 
“Stick  to  your  last!”
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  ①  기원전 350년경 그리스에 Apelles라는 무명의 화가가 살았다.
Apelles
34. Experienced  writers  invariably  write  in  a  climate  of  ②  는 시연회에서 대중의 의견을 듣지 않으려고 하였다.
Apelles
discussion. Their writing is usually embedded in a context  ③  구두장이는  의 작품에 그려진 신발을 칭찬했다.
Apelles
of  others’  ideas  and  opinions.  Many  writers,  especially  in  ④  는 그림을 수정한 후 다시 시연회를 마련했다.
Apelles
the  academic  community,  are  directly  responding  to  other  ⑤  는 구두장이의 해부학적 지식이 풍부함을 인정했다.
writers a scientist reexamining the experimental procedures 
―
of  other  scientists;  a  literary  critic  taking  exception  to  a 
prevailing  method  of  interpretation;  a  sociologist  offering 
an alternative explanation of a colleague’s data; a historian  37. bristlecone  pines에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는 
participating  as  respondent  in  a  conference.  Such  people 
것은?
are not writing in a vacuum. Their ideas often originate in 
Bristlecone  pines  are  unusual  trees  that  grow  in  the 
discussion,  their  writing  is  a  response  to  discussion,  and 
mountain  regions  of  western  America,  sometimes  as  high 
their papers are designed to stimulate further discussion.
as  two  or  more  miles  above  sea  level.  They  grow  very 
the use of discussion in writing slowly  and  range  from  15  to  40  feet  in  height.  These 
① 
the need for self-criticism in writing evergreens  often  live  for  thousands  of  years.  Considering 
② 
advantages of critical thinking on writing the habitat of these trees, such as rocky areas where the soil 
③ 
research methods in scientific experiments is poor and precipitation is slight, it seems almost incredible 
④ 
types of persuasive techniques in academic fields that  they  should  live  so  long  or  even  survive  at  all.  The 
⑤ 
environmental  adversities,  however,  actually  contribute  to 
their longevity. Cells that are produced as a result of these 
35. Habitat  diversity  refers  to  the  variety  of  places  where 
conditions  are  densely  arranged.  The  densely  structured 
life  exists.  Each  habitat  is  the  home  of  numerous  species, 
wood is resistant to invasion by insects and other potential 
most of which depend on that habitat. When it disappears, 
pests.  Bristlecone  pines  grow  faster  in  richer  conditions, 
a vast number of species disappear as well. More often, an 
but  die  earlier  and  soon  decay.  The  harshness  of  their 
entire habitat does not completely disappear but instead is 
surroundings, then, is a vital factor in making them strong 
reduced  gradually  until  only  small  patches  remain.  This 
and sturdy.
has happened to old-growth forests and coastal wetlands in 
the  United  States  and  is  now  occurring  in  tropical  forests  2
①  해발  마일 이상 되는 곳에서 자라기도 한다.     
throughout the world. Elimination of all but small patches of  15 40
②  높이는  피트에서  피트 사이이다.
habitat is especially damaging because it not only eliminates 
③  상록수로서 종종 수천 년 동안 산다.     
many  local  species  but  also  threatens  those  species  that 
④  조직이 조밀하여 해충의 침입에 저항력이 있다.
depend on vast acreage for their survival.
⑤  보다 나은 환경에서는 더 빨리 자라고 더 오래 산다.
5
86 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
38. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?  40. You  see  the  world  as  one  big  contest,  where  everyone 
is competing against everybody else. You feel that there is 
a set amount of good and bad fortune out there. You believe 
that  there  is  no  way  that  everyone  can  have  everything. 
When  other  people  fail,  you  feel  there’s  a  better  chance 
for you to succeed. However, there is not a limited supply 
of  resources  out  there.  When  one  person  wins,  everyone 
wins.  Every  victory  one  person  makes  is  a  breakthrough 
for  all.  Whenever  an  Olympic  swimmer  sets  a  new  world 
record, it inspires others to bring out the best within them 
and  go  beyond  that  achievement  to  set  new  records  of 
human  performance.  Whenever  a  geneticist  unlocks  new 
secrets of the DNA molecule, it adds to our knowledge base 
The above graph shows the percentage of children from 
and  enables  us  to  better  the  human  condition.  Remember 
birth  to  5  years  of  age  by  gender  diagnosed  with  asthma 
that life is a game where there are multiple winners.
in  rural  and  urban  areas  in  Canada  for  the  2000-2001, 
2002-2003,  and  2004-2005  periods. For  both  rural  and 
① ①  경쟁심은 기록 경신의 원동력이다. 
urban  areas,  the  percentages  of  male  children  diagnosed 
②  인생은 예상치 못한 변수로 가득하다.
with asthma were higher than those of female children for 
③  성공하는 사람들은 성취동기가 분명하다.
all  the  periods. During  all  the  periods,  the  percentages 
② ④  자원이 한정된 세상에서 경쟁은 불가피하다.
of  male  children  with  asthma  were  higher  in  urban  areas 
⑤  한 사람의 성공은 다른 사람들에게도 이롭다.
than  in  rural  areas. Regarding  female  children  with 
③
asthma,  the  lowest  percentage  in  urban  areas  was  greater 
than  the  highest  percentage  in  rural  areas. In  urban 
④
areas,  the  percentage  of  male  children  with  asthma  in  the 
2004-2005  period  was  lower  than  that  of  male  children 
with  asthma  in  the  2000-2001  period. In  rural  areas, 
⑤
the  percentages  of  female  children  with  asthma  were  the 
same  in  the  2002-2003  period  and  the  2004-2005  period.
*asthma: 천식
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. 41. University students in several of my seminar classes sat 
in  a  circle  and  each  student  took  turns  telling  the  others 
39. Most  people  attack  a  new  problem  by  relying  heavily 
his or her name. At the end of the round of introductions, 
on  the  tools  and  skills  that  are  most  familiar  to  them. 
the  students  were  asked  to  write  down  the  names  of  as 
While  this  approach  can  work  well  for  problems  that  are 
many  other  students  as  they  could  remember.  In  almost 
similar  to  those  previously  solved,  it  often  fails,  and  fails 
every  case,  students  wrote  down  the  names  of  students 
miserably,  when  a  new  problem  is  particularly  novel.  In 
that were seated far away from them. However, surprisingly, 
this  circumstance,  it  is  best  to  assume  nothing  and  treat 
they weren’t able to recall the names of students who were 
the  problem  as  if  you  have  never  seen  anything  like  it 
seated close to them. This effect was worst for the students 
before.  In  martial  arts,  this  sense  of  looking  freshly  at 
who  sat  on  either  side  of  them.  What  was  the  reason  for 
something is known as ‘beginner’s mind.’ Beginners to any 
such  findings?  The  student  who  was  next  in  line  for  an 
art don’t know what is important and what is irrelevant, so 
introduction was clearly on edge and after finishing his or 
they try to absorb every detail. Experienced martial artists 
her  introduction,  he  or  she  was  preoccupied  with  calming 
use  their  experience  as  a  filter  to  separate  the  essential 
his or her nerves. The effect was clearly due to the social 
from  the  irrelevant.  When  that  filter  mistakenly  screens 
anxiety they experienced immediately before and after having 
out  something  essential,  then  even  seasoned  masters  can 
to introduce themselves to the entire group.
make  mistakes.
Ways to Cope with Nervousness
① 
①  고도의 기술을 연마할 때 진지한 태도를 지녀야 한다.
Useful Strategies for Better Memory
② 
②  실수를 거울삼아 자신의 발전을 도모하는 것이 필요하다.
How to Remember Uncommon Names
③  이미 해결된 문제도 열린 마음으로 다시 볼 필요가 있다. ③ 
Nervousness and Its Effects on Memory
④  직관보다는 경험에 의존하여 문제를 해결하는 것이 중요하다. ④ 
Seating Arrangements for Better Relations
⑤  새로운 문제는 초심자의 시각으로 접근하는 것이 바람직하다. ⑤ 
6
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 77
42. Richard  Dawkins  and  John  Krebs  argued  that  although  44. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절한 곳은?
in some circumstances it might be appropriate to describe 
However, recent success in the packaged-cookie market 
animal  signals  as  transferring  information,  in  many  other, 
suggests  that  these  may  not  be  the  only,  or  perhaps 
perhaps  most,  cases  there  would  be  such  a  conflict  of 
even the most important, reasons.
interest between signaller and receiver that it is more accurate 
to  describe  the  signaller  as  attempting  to  ‘manipulate’  the 
Why  eat  a  cookie?  Some  reasons  might  be  to  satisfy 
receiver rather than just inform it. For example, an angler 
your  hunger,  to  increase  your  sugar  level,  or  just  to  have 
fish that dangles a worm-like bit of skin in front of a small  something to chew on. ( ) It appears that cookie-producing 
①
fish  and  catches  it  because  the  smaller  fish  snaps  at  the  companies  are  becoming  aware  of  some  other  influences 
‘worm’ can certainly be said to have carried out a successful  and,  as  a  result,  are  delivering  to  the  market  products 
manipulation  of  its  prey.  In  this  case,  if  information  has  resulting from their awareness. ( ) These relatively new 
②
been transferred, it is most definitely false. product offerings are usually referred to as ‘soft’ or ‘chewy’ 
*dangle: 매달다 cookies, to distinguish them from the more typical crunchy 
Are Smaller Fishes Smarter? varieties.  ( ) Why  all  the  fuss  over  their  introduction? 
①  ③
Talking Animals: Fact or Myth? ( )  Apparently  much  of  their  appeal  has  to  do  with 
②  ④
Cooperation in the Animal World  childhood memories of sitting on the back steps devouring 
③ 
those  melt-in-your-mouth  cookies  that  were  delivered  by 
Manipulation: Tricking the Signaller
④ 
Mom  straight  from  the  oven,  while  they  were  still  soft.  
Animal Messages: Not What They Seem
⑤ 
( ) This emotional and sensory appeal of soft cookies is 
⑤
apparently  at  least  as  strong  as  are  the  physical  cravings 
that the product satisfies.
(A)
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 
Unlike  the  modern  society,  the  primitive  society  has 
less specialized knowledge to transmit, and since its way 
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?  of life is enacted before the eyes of all, it has no need 
to create a separate institution of education such as the 
The body has been viewed as a ‘natural’ phenomenon
school.  Instead,  the  child  acquires  the  heritage  of  his 
a fixed, unchanging fact of nature. Recently, however, 
― culture by observing and imitating adults in such activities 
it  is  also  being  seen  as  a  part  of  culture  in  the  sense 
as  rituals,  hunts,  festivals,  cultivation,  and  harvesting. 
that it can be socially defined in different ways.
As a result, there is little or none of that alienation of 
young from old so marked in modern industrial societies. 
(A) It has also opened up new questions and issues in the 
A further reason for this alienation in modern societies 
sociology  of  sport.  Some  people  in  the  sociology  of 
is that in his conception of reality the modern adult owes 
sport  are  now  working  with  colleagues  in  other 
less to his direct experience and more to the experience 
disciplines who share interests in the body.
of his culture than does primitive man. Clearly, his debt 
(B) Social  definitions  of  the  body  are  grounded  in  social  to  culture  will  vary  with  the  nature  of  his  education. 
relations  and  influenced  by  those  with  the  power  to  Hence, the contemporary child must travel much further 
promote  agreement  about  what  should  be  considered  than the offspring of primitive man to acquire the world 
‘natural’ when it comes to the body. This new way of  view  of  his  elders.  He  is,  therefore,  that  much  more 
thinking about the body has challenged the traditional  removed from the adults of his society. 
󰀻
mind-body split that has characterized Western thought 
since the time of Plato.
Unlike the primitive child who learns from his  (A)  
(C) In  their  work  they  are  asking  critical  questions  about  surroundings,  the  modern  child  learns  in  educational 
how the body is trained, disciplined, and manipulated in  institutions, which results in  (B) from his elders.
sports and how some sport scientists are using technology 
(A) (B)
to  probe,  monitor,  test,  evaluate,  and  rehabilitate  the 
foreign interference
body as a performance machine. ① ……
immediate sympathy
② ……
(A) (B) (C) (B) (A) (C)
①  - - ②  - - ③ foreign …… sympathy
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B) imaginary alienation
③  - - ④  - - ④ ……
(C) (B) (A) immediate alienation
⑤  - - ⑤ ……
7
88 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
(B)
[46～47] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
She  knew  that  her  class  had  little  trouble  with  simple 
Many people believe that it is critical to share similar, if 
variations  and  could  easily  identify  themes  that  were 
not identical, beliefs and values with someone with whom 
repeated  in  a  similar  way.  But  when  the  theme  showed 
they have a relationship. While this may seem preferable, it 
much variation, the students’ attention focused on the new 
is  far  from  mandatory.  Individuals  from  extremely  diverse 
detail  to  such  an  extent  that  they  no  longer  ‘heard’  the 
backgrounds have learned to overlook their differences and 
basic theme. For a week or two, the teacher worried about 
live  harmonious,  loving  lives  together.  I’ve  seen  people 
the problem. Other teachers advised (b)her to go on with 
from  opposite  ends  of  the  spectrum  economically  and 
something else, but she continued to search for a solution.
politically that ended up in happy, lasting marriages. I’ve 
seen  couples  from  different  ethnic  groups  merge  into 
(C) 
harmonious  relationships,  and  I’ve  seen  people  from 
The  following  day  in  class,  (c)she  asked  how  many 
different religions come together for a strong, lasting bond. 
students had tape recorders. A dozen or so students said, 
Furthermore,  many  good  friends  have  little  in  common 
“I do.” The teacher said excitedly, “I have an idea. Let’s 
except  a  warm  loving  feeling  of  respect  and  rapport. 
play Beethoven’s Eroica again. One of you can record the 
That’s the only essential thing.
theme when it’s first introduced. Then later, someone else 
People who enjoy the best relationships with others, who 
can  record  it  the  second  time  it  appears.  Finally,  we’ll 
live life with the least frustration regarding their differences, 
have another person record when it appears next. Then we 
have learned that differences are to be expected, a fact of 
can start all three tape recorders at exactly the same time 
life. This understanding must go beyond a mere intellectual 
to see if the recordings fit!” Her students looked at (d)her 
‘I know we’re all different.’ You must truly own this idea 
in surprise. Suddenly, however, delight appeared on their 
and incorporate it into your daily life. 
faces. And so it was done. When they played the recordings 
The  way  I  see  it,  we  have  only  two  realistic  choices. 
simultaneously,  the  sounds  blended  sufficiently  for  the 
We can               the principle of separate realities and 
students to recognize their commonality.
remain  frustrated  and  angry  over  the  fact  that  no  one 
seems  to  conform  to  our  way  of  thinking,  or  we  can 
(D)
strive to understand what in Eastern philosophy is called 
With  this  problem  in  mind,  one  afternoon  during  the 
‘the  way  of  things.’  Separate  realities  is  the  way  things 
lunch hour, she noticed a group of students gathered in a 
really  are.  Everyone  is  unique  and  has  different  gifts  to 
corner of the school yard. Several girls were moving their 
offer.  When  we  look  for  these  gifts  we  will  surely  find 
bodies  rhythmically.  Curious,  she  drew  closer  and  found 
them and in doing so, we will open the door to a world 
―
that the students were listening to a new rock hit. A girl 
of personal growth.            * rapport: 친밀한(공감적인) 관계
in the center of the group held a tape recorder in (e)her 
 
hand. At that moment, a sudden inspiration took hold.
46. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은?
Facing Challenges in Life
①  48. 주어진 글 (A)에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 
Leading an Intellectual Life
②  가장 적절한 것은? 
Finding Meaning in Friendship
③  (B) (C) (D) (B) (D) (C)
①  - - ②  - -
Accepting Differences in Others
④  (C) (B) (D) (C) (D) (B)
③  - - ④  - -
Enriching Life through Meditation
⑤  (D) (B) (C)
⑤  - -
(a) (e)
47. 위 글의 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은? 49. 밑줄 친 ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
resist establish master 것은?
①  ②  ③ 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
grasp overestimate ①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
④  ⑤ 
50. 주어진 글의 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
[48～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
① 교사는 고전 음악에서 주제가 반복됨을 학생들에게 이해시키려 했다.
(A)
②  학생들은 단순한 변주 부분을 이해하는 데 별 문제가 없었다.
③  교사는 학생들에게 녹음기를 가지고 있는지를 물었다.
After several futile attempts to teach the role of theme, 
④ 학생들은 자신들이 녹음한 세 부분을 차례로 재생해 들었다.
or the prominent repeated melody, in classical music, the 
⑤ 몇몇 학생들이 점심시간에 운동장에서 록 음악을 듣고 있었다.
teacher  was  at  wit’s  end.  Having  reminded  her  students 
many times that composers like Wagner depended on the 
listeners’  remembering  the  earlier  theme  to  recognize  its  *  확인 사항
later  use,  (a)she  was  determined  to  make  her  students 
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
understand that themes recur throughout a piece. 
하시오.
8
8※ 시험이 시작되기 전까지 표지를 넘기지 마시오.to fix the lock to contact the landlord
to pick up the suit to clean the apartment
to call customer service
TV
$3.00 $5.00 $8.00 $10.00 $12.00
classroom cinema gymnasium
hospital museum
to buy her a meal
to lend her his scanner
surprised and envious nervous and lonely
to buy her more folders
satisfied and delighted upset and embarrassed
to repair her old scanner
impressed and thankful
to put her documents on the shelf
registration clerk student
*warranty: 
registration clerk librarian
computer technician student Ann’s Electronics Clark’s Outlet
computer technician librarian Frank’s Computers Jason’s Electronics
computer technician registration clerk Tyson’s ComputersPeter
UN
Peter’s mother: _____________________________________
Thanks. I’ll never forget the breakfast you made.
I’m touched, but your aunt will do the cooking.
Your father has already made the bed for me.
I’ve arranged for you to cook for your aunt.
You’ll get better soon if you take a rest.
it
Nothing can be checked out or renewed without it. If you 
reside  in  this  area,  you  may  get  it  free  of  charge.  Kids 
under  18  need  their  parent’s  signature  on  the  registration 
form  to  receive  it.  The  standard  loan  period  is  21  days. 
Books  can  be  renewed  once  for  the  original  loan  period 
unless they are on reserve. Videos and DVDs can be loaned 
for 2 days and cannot be renewed. Borrowers are responsible 
for returning items on time and in good condition.
Woman: _________________________________________ a cash card a business card
a meal coupon a library card
I can play football in the wind and rain.
a discount coupon
How about playing football in the park instead?
Thanks for telling me about the weather forecast.
it
The rainstorm will be here sooner than you think.
Not  only  does  the  ‘leaf  fish’  look  like  a  leaf,  but  it 
Let’s go hiking on the mountain and stay overnight.
also  imitates  the  movement  of  a  drifting  leaf  underwater. 
Its hunting technique is not to swiftly pursue its victim, but 
to wait for  it. Hanging at an angle in the water, the leaf 
fish is carried along by the currents until  it comes near 
a smaller fish. Then,  it seizes the unsuspecting prey with 
Man: ____________________________________________
a  lightning-fast  snap  of  the  jaws,  and  swallows  the  prey 
I don’t like going to the zoo. Let’s take a break.
down  head  first.  At  close  range  the  rapid  opening  of  the 
I don’t think we need to rent this video tape.
leaf fish’s large jaws enables  it to suck in the unfortunate 
Good! What time does the news start?
individual very easily.
You could have phoned me about being late.
The video art may not be as bad as you think. 
When one group borrows something such as ideas, values, 
foods, or styles of architecture from another group, change 
occurs through diffusion.  Diffusion is a process by which 
one culture or society borrows from another.  The extent 
Woman: _________________________________________
and rate of diffusion depend on the degree of social contact. 
I’m sorry you couldn’t help me out.
The  more  contact  a  group  has  with  another  group,  the 
No problem. I’ll be happy to help you.
more  likely  it  is  that  objects  or  ideas  will  be  exchanged. 
Well, my uncle runs a local record shop. The  exclusion  of  new  technology  generally  leads  to 
I’m starting to learn guitar from my uncle. social  change  that  will  soon  follow.  Social  contact, 
Don’t worry. I’ll ask him to fix your guitar. therefore, plays a crucial role in the process of diffusion.Thank  you  for  sending  your  poems  to  this  publishing 
house. I have had the opportunity to look them over, and  Walking  down  the  street,  you  may  not  even  notice  the 
I  feel  that  they  show  considerable  promise,  despite  your  trees,  but,  according  to  a  new  study,  they  do  a  lot  more 
youth  and  lack  of  experience  in  this  genre.  There  is  still  than give shade. Environmental scientists chose two Chicago 
much  room  for  development,  however,  and  I  am  afraid  public  housing  projects,  both  of  which  had  some  buildings 
they  are  not  yet  appropriate  for  publishing  in  any  of  our  with  lots  of  trees  nearby,  and  some  with  practically  none. 
current  poetry  journals.  You  indicate  in  your  cover  letter  According  to  the  study,  violence  and  property  crimes  were 
that  you  intend  to  follow  a  literary  career.  Please  allow  nearly  twice  as  high  in  sections  of  the  buildings  where 
me to offer my best wishes for your future literary efforts. vegetation  was  low,  compared  with  the  sections  where 
vegetation was high. Why? One explanation: Greenery creates 
a  natural  gathering  space  for  neighbors  and,  ultimately, 
stronger __________ in the community. This can also create 
an  atmosphere  where  children  are  better  supervised,  and 
buildings better watched.
fear traps quarrels
(A) (B) (C) bias bonds
I  was  five  years  old  when  my  father  introduced  me  to 
People  tend  to  stick  to  their  first  impressions,  even  if 
motor  sports.  Dad  thought  (A) it/which  was  a  normal 
they  are  wrong.  Suppose  you  mention  the  name  of  your 
family outing to go to a car racing event. It was his way 
new  neighbor  to  a  friend.  “Oh,  I  know  him,”  your  friend 
of  spending  some  quality  time  with  his  wife  and  kids. 
replies. “He seems nice at first, but it’s all an act.” Perhaps 
(B) Few/Little  did  he  know  that  he  was  fueling  his  son 
this  evaluation  is  groundless.  The  neighbor  may  have 
with  a  passion  that  would  last  for  a  lifetime.  I  still 
changed  since  your  friend  knew  him,  or  perhaps  your 
remember  the  awesome  feeling  I  had  on  that  day  in  May 
friend’s judgment is simply unfair. Whether the judgment is 
when  my  little  feet  (C) carried/were  carried  me  up  the 
accurate  or  not,  once  you  accept  it,  it  will  probably 
stairs into the grandstands at the car racing stadium.
influence the way you respond to the neighbor. Even if this 
(A) (B) (C)
neighbor  were  a  saint,  you  would  be  likely  to  interpret  his 
it Little carried
behavior in ways that _____________________.
it Few were carried
fit your expectation upgrade your status
it Little were carried
make you intelligent keep you wealthy
which Few carried
remove your prejudice
which Little were carried
A common mistake in talking to celebrities is to assume 
that they don’t know much about anything else except their 
occupations.  In  fact,  the  movie  business  and  the  athletic 
To  be  a  mathematician  you  don’t  need  an  expensive 
world are full of intelligent, educated, and informed men and 
laboratory. The typical equipment  of  a  mathematician  is 
women who are interested and involved in a wide variety of 
a blackboard and chalk. It is better to do mathematics on 
activities and causes. Yet they are asked only about acting or 
a blackboard  than on a piece of paper because chalk is 
sports.  If  you  happen  to  know  about  the  celebrity’s 
easier  to  erase,  and  mathematical  research  is  often  filled 
‘extracurricular’ interest, you might find he or she will speak 
with mistakes. One more thing you need to do is to join a 
to  you  about  it  much  more  freely  than  about  his  or  her 
club  devotes  to  mathematics.  Not  many  mathematicians 
________________.  For  example,  ask  Paul  Newman,  the 
can  work  alone;  they  need  to  talk  about  what  they  are 
famous actor, about his charity work with kids. 
doing. If you want to be a mathematician, you had better 
expose  your  new  ideas  to  the  criticism  of  others.  It  is  personal disaster pastime activities
so  easy  to  include  hidden  assumptions  that  you  do  not  family background professional life
see but that are obvious to others. political opinionsUpon  entering  a  record  store,  one  encounters  a  wide 
variety  of  genres  from  easy  listening  to  jazz  and  classical 
music. Jazz and classical music have a number of things in 
common.  However,  they  also have a number of differences. 
Before  sound  recording,  classical  music  was  passed  down 
through  written  scores,  whereas  early  jazz  mainly  relied  on 
live  performance.  The  composers  are  in  control  in  classical  (A) (B) (C)
music;  they  write  the  musical  notes  along  with  detailed 
instructions.  In  jazz,  on  the  contrary,  the  performers  often 
Although most people recognize it as a jewel, the diamond 
improvise  their  own  melodies.  In  sum,  classical  music  and 
most  directly  affects  our  daily  lives  as  a  tool.  Industrial 
jazz  both  aim  to  provide  a  depth  of  expression  and  detail, 
diamonds  are  so  important  that  a  (A) shortage/strength 
but they ___________________________________________.
would  cause  a  breakdown  in  the  metal-working  industry 
take different approaches to record sales and  would  destroy  mass  production.  Industrial  diamonds 
owe their traditions to the easy listening genre are crushed and powdered, and then used in many grinding 
achieve their goal through different approaches and  polishing  operations.  Their  use  (B) changes/ranges 
rely on composers to write their improvisations from the drill in a dentist’s office to saws for cutting rocks, 
depend on their music scores to gain popularity and to glass cutters. The great (C) hardness/hardship of a 
diamond  makes  it  one  of  the  most  important  industrial 
materials known.
(A) (B) (C)
Our  guest  arrived  in  the  broadcasting  studio,  and  I  shortage ranges hardness
opened  my  show  at  11:05  with  a  brief  introduction  about  shortage changes hardship
his  background.  Then  I  asked  my  first  question,  and  he  strength changes hardness
just said, “I don’t know.” A few more questions followed, 
strength ranges hardship
but  all  were  answered  in  one  of  three  ways:  “Yes.” 
strength ranges hardness
“No.” or “I don’t know.” I looked up at the clock in the 
studio.  It  was  11:09,  and  I  was  out  of  material.  I  had 
nothing  left  to  ask  this  guy.  Everyone  in  the  studio  was 
standing  around  with  the  same  thought:  “What  are  we 
going  to  do?  We  have  fifty  minutes  left.  Listeners  all 
over  the  country  are  going  to  reach  for  the  tuning  dials 
on their radios any second now.”
fur
lively and excited anxious and concerned
calm and relieved anticipating and grateful
back flap
bored and indifferent
sash
ear flap
Of  all  the  ways  that  automobiles  damage  the  urban  The Nambawi is one of the oldest traditional winter hats 
environment  and  lower  the  quality  of  life  in  big  cities,  in  Korea.  At  first,  only  men  and  women  of  the  upper 
few  are  as  maddening  and  unnecessary  as  car  alarms.  classes wore it. Later, it was worn by the commoners, and 
Alarms are more than just an annoyance; they are a costly  still  later  only  by  women.  The  hat  protects  the  head  and 
public  health  problem  and  a  constant  irritation  to  urban  forehead  from  freezing  winds  and  has  a  round  opening 
civil  life.  The  benefits,  meanwhile,  are  nonexistent.  Auto  at  the  top.  There  is  a  long  back  flap  for  the  back  of  the 
makers,  alarm  installers,  insurers,  police,  and  the  biggest  neck,  and  ear  flaps  on  both  sides  reveal  the  ears.  Silk 
experts  of  all car  thieves all  agree  that  alarms  do  sashes  are  attached  to  the  ear  flaps.  The  sashes  are 
nothing  to  stop  theft.  What’s  more,  there  are  now  a  tied under the chin to hold the hat tightly in place. The 
number of good, inexpensive car security devices available  bottom  of  the  Nambawi  is  bordered  with  fur,  and  the  hat 
on  the  market.  It’s  time  for  us  all  to  reconsider  the  is  decorated with flower and bird patterns.
seriousness of the problem and to do something about it.  *sash:  ,  **flap: (A) (B)
For example on the other hand
All  travellers  should  ensure  they  have  adequate  travel 
For example worst of all
insurance  before  they  depart.  A  suitable  insurance  policy 
In addition worst of all
should  provide  coverage  for  medical  expenses  arising  from 
Otherwise by all means
illness  or  accident  prior  to  or  during  their  vacation,  loss  of 
Otherwise on the other hand
vacation  money,  and  cancellation  of  the  holiday.  Please 
keep  your  insurance  policy  and  emergency  contact  details 
with you at all times. Before departure, you will be required 
to  provide  your  tour  leader  with  a  copy  of  your  insurance 
policy covering the period of travel. Without this information,  Dominique-Jean Larrey
you will not be allowed to travel with the group.
coverage of car insurance
Dominique-Jean  Larrey  was  born  on  July  8,  1766,  in 
selection of travel agencies
France.  Larrey  began  his  medical  studies  in  Toulouse. 
necessity of travel insurance During the Revolution, in 1792, he joined the Army of the 
conditions of health insurance North as a military surgeon. He introduced field hospitals, 
promotion of tourist attractions ambulance service, and first-aid treatment to the battlefield. 
He  eventually  became  principal  surgeon  of  the  French 
Army  and  thereafter  followed  Napoleon  Bonaparte  in 
almost all his campaigns in Egypt, Italy, Russia, and finally 
at  Waterloo.  After  the  fall  of  Napoleon,  Larrey’s  medical 
Every  society  needs  heroes,  and  every  society  has  them. 
reputation saved him, and he was named a member of the 
Some heroes shine in the face of great adversity, performing 
Academy of Medicine at its founding in 1820.
amazing  deeds  in  difficult  situations;  other  heroes  do  their 
*campaign: 
work  quietly,  unnoticed  by  most  of  us,  but  making  a 
difference in the lives of other people. Whatever their type,  Toulouse
heroes  are  selfless  people  who  perform  extraordinary  acts.  1792
The true mark of heroes lies not necessarily in the result of 
their  actions,  but  in  what  they  are  willing  to  do  for  others 
and  for  their  chosen  causes.  Even  if  they  fail,  their 
determination lives on to inspire the rest of us. Their glory 
lies not in their achievements but in their sacrifices.
Floppy Barrow
Floppy  Barrow  is  a  game  invented  by  Phil  and  Alan 
Grace,  and  Tim  Inglis  in  South  Australia.  In  the  game, 
the  players  use  a  broomstick  to  throw  an  old  bicycle  tire 
that  has  been  specially  modified  to  make  it  floppy.  The 
(A) (B)
game  can  be  played  with  2  to  6  players  and  is  scored 
similarly  to  tennis.  It  can  be  played  with  or  without  a 
net  by  defining  the  court  and  scoring  against  mistakes, 
Design and styling cannot be fully understood outside of 
such  as  dropping  the  tire  in-court  or  throwing  it  out  of 
their social, economic, political, cultural, and technological 
contexts.  (A) ,  the  cycles  of  Western  economies  bounds  on  the  opponents’  side.  Floppy  Barrow  builds 
upper  body  muscles  a  lot,  so  it  provides  a  good  and 
during  the  20th  century  had  a  significant  impact  on  the 
exciting form of exercise.
prevalence of objects that emphasized design over styling
*floppy: 
and  the  other  way  round.  While  design  and  styling  are 
interrelated,  they  are  completely  distinct  fields.  Styling  is 
concerned  with  surface  treatment  and  appearance,  the 
expressive  qualities  of  a  product.  Design,  (B) ,  is 
primarily  concerned  with  problem  solving,  the  function  of 
a product. It generally seeks simplification and essentiality.Every  mother  and  father  wants  to  raise  a  child  with  a 
strong  moral  character.  We  want  our  children  to  know 
good  from  bad,  and  right  from  wrong.  We  hope  they’ll 
learn  to  behave  morally  and  ethically,  and  grow  up  to  be 
honest  and  considerate.  In  short,  we  want  our  children  to 
develop  a  conscience a  powerful  inner  voice  that  will 
keep  them  on  the  right  path.  But  a  conscience  does  not 
develop by itself, so the job of building one is ours. It’s a 
process  parents  need  to  work  on  day  after  day,  and  year 
after  year.  We  need  to  constantly  distinguish  right  from 
wrong,  and  to  model  appropriate  behavior.  Eventually,  our 
children  will  fully  accept  our  messages,  and  they  will 
become the essence of their character.
In the above chart, the five items in the middle show the 
environment-friendly  improvements  made  by  a  company 
from 2001 to 2005. The left bar chart shows the costs of 
carrying  them  out,  and  the  right  bar  chart  shows  the 
resulting  savings  during  the  same  period.  The  company 
reduced  its  water  use  by  installing  automatic  faucets  and 
water-saving toilets, saving 152,000 dollars.  The greatest 
saving  came  from  the  installation  of  energy-saving  lights. 
Timed  shut-offs  of  electricity  came  second  in  savings. 
These  two  improvements  cost  much  less  than  the  other 
measures.  The  most  expensive  installation  was  that  of 
smart  escalators.  Although  the  installation  costs  differed, 
all the improvements resulted in savings for the company.
Footwear has a history which goes back thousands of 
years, and it has long been an article of necessity. 
(A) The  earliest  footwear  was  undoubtedly  born  of  the 
necessity  to  provide  some  protection  when  moving 
Over  the  past  twenty  years,  I’ve  asked  thousands  of  over  rough  ground  in  varying  weather  conditions.  In 
people,  “Where  are  you  when  you  get  your  best  ideas?”  ancient  times,  as  today,  the  basic  type  of  shoes  worn 
The most frequent answers are: ‘resting in bed,’ ‘walking in  depended on the climate. 
nature,’  ‘listening  to  music  while  driving  in  my  car,’  and  (B) Shoes have not always served such a purely functional 
‘relaxing  in  the  bath.’  People  rarely  get  their  best  ideas  at  purpose,  however,  and  the  requirements  of  fashion 
work.  What  is  so  special  about  walking  in  the  woods  or  have  dictated  some  curious  designs,  not  all  of  which 
resting  in  bed?  Solitude  and  relaxation.  Most  people  have  made walking easy.
their  best  ideas  when  they  are  relaxed  and  by  themselves.  (C) For  instance,  in  warmer  areas  the  sandal  was,  and 
Leonardo  da  Vinci  once  wrote,  “If  you  are  alone  you  are  still  is,  the  most  popular  form  of  footwear,  whereas 
completely  yourself,  but  if  you  are  accompanied  by  a  the  modern  moccasin  derives  from  the  original  shoes 
single companion you are half yourself.” adopted  in  cold  climates  by  races  such  as  Eskimos 
and Siberians.
*moccasin: 
(A) (B) (C) (A) (C) (B)
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)
(C) (B) (A)gloomy and pitiful festive and joyful
calm and peaceful promising and hopeful
The story starts in the world of Homer, where the stormy 
relaxing and encouraging
skies  and  the  dark  seas  were  ruled  by  the  mythical  gods. 
Every advance in human understanding since then has been 
made  by  brave  individuals  daring to step into the unknown 
darkness and to break free from accepted ways of thinking. 
Most of those steps were small and difficult, but a few were 
From  there  they  were  taken  to  Arizona  and  were 
brilliant  and  beautiful.  As  Gustave  Flaubert  wrote,  “Among 
reassembled by workers in the Arizona desert.
those  who  go  to  sea  there  are  the  explorers  who  discover 
new worlds, adding continents to the Earth and stars to the  In the early 1960s, London Bridge was in trouble. Cars, 
heavens;  they  are  the  masters,  the  great,  the  eternally  trucks, and buses were too heavy for it, and the bridge was 
shining.”  It  is  those  explorers,  through  their  unceasing  trial  sinking  into  the  Thames  river.  ( )  London  city 
and error, who have paved the way for us to follow. officials wanted to build a new bridge, and a businessman 
named Robert McCulloch decided to buy the old bridge and 
The Earth and the Heavens
move  it  to  Arizona.  ( )  Workers  disassembled  the 
Gods and Their Worshipers
bridge in 1968, numbering the bricks, and sent them to Los 
Great Sea Explorers of Our Time
Angeles.  ( )  The  bridge  was  finally  completed  in 
Pioneers in Human Understanding
1971. ( ) However, McCulloch knew he needed more 
Importance of Conventional Wisdom
than  a  famous  bridge  to  attract  people  to  Lake  Havasu 
City, so he created an English village with typical English 
Most  of  us  believe  that  we  can  trust  in  technology  to 
shops  and  restaurants.  ( )  Today,  London  Bridge  is 
solve  our  problems.  Whatever  problem  you  name,  you  can  one of Arizona’s biggest attractions.
also  name  some  hoped-for  technological  solution.  Some  of 
us  have  faith  that  we  shall  solve  our  dependence  on  fossil  (A)
fuels by developing new technologies for hydrogen engines, 
(B)
wind  energy,  or  solar  energy.  Some  of  us  have  faith  that 
we shall solve our food problems with genetically modified  People  who  run  sports  camps  think  of  the  children 
crops  newly  or  soon  to  be  developed.  Those  with  such  first. They do their best to create enjoyable and protective 
faith  assume  that  the  new  technologies  will  ultimately  environments in which the children feel comfortable and 
succeed, without harmful side effects. However, there is no  safe.  Unfortunately,  some  sports  coaches  in  the  camps 
basis  for  believing  that  technology  will  not  cause  new  and  occasionally become over-enthusiastic in their desire to 
unanticipated  problems  while  solving  the  problems  that  it  help  the  children  excel.  As  a  result,  they  put  pressure 
previously produced. on them to perform at high levels, win at all costs, and 
keep  playing,  even  when  they  get  hurt.  This  ‘no  pain, 
Methods of Controlling New Technology
no  gain’  approach  is  extremely  stressful,  and  leads  to 
Technology: Its Past, Present, and Future
unnecessary  injuries.  Parents  should  therefore  take  care 
Common Misconceptions about Technology
when  they  send  their  children  to  a  sports  camp,  and 
Great Contributions of Technology to Humans
should  talk  with  the  sports  coaches  to  see  if  they  will 
Ultimate Solutions for Fuel and Food Problems
respect the children’s wishes.
In  choosing  the  most  (A)   sports  camp  for 
After  the  snowstorm  came  thick  fog,  and  in  that  fog, 
their children, parents should make sure that the coaches 
Fredrick’s  men  soon  lost  their  way  on  an  ice  river  with 
have  (B)  attitudes to children.
hundreds  of  big  holes  in  it.  Not  only  could  they  see 
nothing  in  front  of  them,  but  they  were  tired  and  ill  and 
(A) (B)
could not walk any more. So they had to stay in their tents 
inexpensive competitive
near the mountains for four days. After that time, Fredrick 
challenging demanding
went  to  Albert  Marshall’s  tent.  “You  are  ill,  Albert,”  he 
famous sociable
said. “You can’t come to the Pole. Take two men and go 
intensive liberal
back tomorrow.” Next day, Fredrick watched regretfully as 
suitable caring
Marshall’s sled disappeared slowly in the distance.(A)
Person  A Most  people  agree  that  fruit  is  a  valuable, 
They  all  reached  the  beach  two  hours  later,  exhausted  healthy  food.  Nonetheless,  they  usually  throw  away  a 
but  safe.  At  that  time,  the  non-swimmer  thanked  Margo  very  nutritious  part  of  the  fruit the  peel.  In  fact,  fruit 
for saving his life, and (a)he asked why she had been so  peel contains essential vitamins and is a source of dietary 
insistent  about  going  slowly  and  quietly.  “Because,”  she  fiber. Dietary fiber helps to lower the level of cholesterol 
said to him, “for one thing, I knew it was a long way and  and  blood  sugar,  which  reduces  the  risk  of  heart  disease 
we had to conserve our energy. For another, that ocean is  and  diabetes.  Fiber  also  helps  to  lessen  calorie  intake, 
full  of  sharks  and  I  didn’t  care  to  attract  their  attention.  because  people  don’t  feel  hungry  even  though  they  eat 
But  if  I’d  told  you  that,  you  might  have  panicked  and  less.  Eating  fruit  peel  can  also  help  to  decrease  the 
none of us would have made it.” amount  of  food  waste  which  is  a  cause  of  pollution. 
Finally,  I  think  people  who  eat  fruit  peel  prefer  organic 
(B)
food, which encourages farmers to use less pesticide and 
Margo  took  charge.  She  shouted  out  orders.  She  told 
thus to contribute to a cleaner environment. 
each  person  to  take  a  wooden  board,  use  it  as  a  float, 
and  begin  kicking  slowly  toward  shore.  She  ordered 
Person  B Personally,  I  don’t  like  the  bitter  taste  and 
(b)the  non-swimmer  to  share  a  piece  of  board  with  her. 
roughness  of  fruit  peel,  though  I  understand  that  it  has 
“Kick  softly,”  she  told  him,  “Don’t  stir  up  the  water 
some  nutritious  value  and  contains  dietary  fiber.  Even 
more  than  you  have  to.”  With  Margo’s  firm  presence 
so,  I  don’t  think  it  is  wise  to  eat  fruit  without  peeling 
next  to  him,  the  non-swimmer  avoided  panic.  When 
it. You might think you’re removing all the pesticide on 
every  now  and  then  his  kicking  became  awkward  and 
the  fruit  when  you  wash  it,  but  some  chemicals  are 
noisy,  Margo  ordered  (c)him  to  stop.  Slowly  and 
bound  to  remain  on  the  surface  of  the  peel.  The  use  of 
quietly, the five moved toward the distant shore.
detergent  to  clean  the  fruit  can  also  cause  additional 
(C)
water  pollution.  Another  reason  for  removing  the  peel 
Margo  was  on  holiday  with  friends,  three  miles  off  before  eating  is  that  some  fruits  such  as  apples,  pears, 
the Kenyan coast in the Indian Ocean, in a fishing boat.  and  grapes  have  a  tough  skin,  which  can  be  harder  to 
Suddenly  the  engine  died,  and  for  mysterious  reasons,  chew and to digest.
the  boat  began  to  sink.  Before  they  knew  what  was 
*dietary fiber:  **pesticide: 
happening,  Margo,  her  three  friends,  and  (d)the  African 
boatman  were  in  the  sea.  They  all  had  life  jackets,  but 
it  was  a  long  way  to  shore.  Around  them  were  lots  of 
wooden  barrels  and  boards.  At  that  moment,  (e)one  of 
the use of pesticide the use of detergent
the three friends said, “I don’t know how to swim.”
the eating of fruit peel the nutrition in fruit peel
the recycling of food waste
(A) (C) (B) (B) (A) (C) (B) (C) (A)
(C) (A) (B) (C) (B) (A)
(a) (e) A
A
B
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
B
Bto hold a fund-raising party
to pay a visit to an orphanage
to open a bank account as a gift
to donate money for starving children
to design a poster for a charity campaign
worried amused bored
jealous  uninterested
clapping laughing  napping
coughing whispering   
to send flowers to her
to check the assignment
 to find a doctor’s phone number
to ask his mom about food poisoning
to help her with the history homework
$70  $75 $80     $85 $90 Cathy  Robert Lauren Tim StevePeter
Peter:____________________________________________
It’s the best way to listen to the audience.
Could you be a substitute for me?
Please get rid of your bad habit.
How did you recognize her voice? 
Did you improve your current situation? 
This[this]
A  world  without  this  is  almost  unimaginable.  This  plays 
an essential role in various scientific fields and in industry. 
It is used throughout the home, at work, and often in play. 
One  of  the  greatest  benefits  of  this  is  that  it  lets  in  light 
and provides protection from the weather at the same time. 
This  allows  daylight  in  but  keeps  out  cold  or  stormy 
weather.  Electric  bulbs  transmit  light  but  keep  out  the 
oxygen  that  would  cause  their  hot  filaments  to  burn  up. 
Woman:__________________________________________
Television  picture  tubes  enable  viewers  to  see  the  image 
Computers are on sale at a new store.
that  is  formed  inside  the  tube.  Bottles  can  reveal  their 
We need to get really expensive ones.
contents without being opened. 
The basketball game has been canceled. 
*filament:
 I’d better go right now to buy new shoes.
glass steel wood
I bought a basketball from an Internet site.
stone rubber
Man:_____________________________________________ They[they]
No way! My neighbor has a beautiful garden.
I know. They need to plant more trees on the street.  The  first  true  piece  of  sports  equipment  that  man 
Really? Walking is the easiest way to keep ourselves fit.  invented  was  the  ball.  In  ancient  Egypt,  pitching  stones 
You’re right. That’s why I prefer sending text messages. was  children’s  favorite  game,  but  a  badly  thrown  rock 
could  hurt  a  child.  Egyptians  were  therefore  looking  for 
That’s terrible. Anyway, I’ve learned a lesson this time.
something  less  dangerous  to  throw.  And  they  developed 
what  were  probably  the  first  balls.  They  were  first 
made  of  grass  or  leaves  held  together  by  strings,  and  later 
of  pieces  of  animal  skin  sewn  together  and  stuffed  with 
Woman:__________________________________________
feathers  or  hay.  Even  though  the  Egyptians  were  warlike, 
Don’t worry. Just ask a librarian for help.  
they  found  time  for  peaceful  games.  Before  long  they 
Yes. It’s very considerate of you to say so.  devised  a  number  of  ball  games.  Perhaps  they  played 
That sounds terrific. I really love wildflowers. ball  more  for  instruction  than  for  fun.  Ball  playing  was 
That’s not fair. I can’t go hiking all by myself. thought  of  mainly  as  a  way  to  teach  young  men  the  speed 
Take it easy. You can grow wildflowers at home. and skill they would need for war. It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  inform  you  that  your  sons  Over  the  years  various  systems  of  grading  coins  have 
and daughters have completed all the academic requirements  been developed by antique coin specialists.  In America a 
over the last three years of study at Hutt High School. We 
numerical  system  based  on  a  scale  of  1  to  70  has  been 
feel as if the day they entered our school were yesterday, 
introduced,  in  which  1  is  the  lowest  grade  possible  and  70 
and  now  they  will  proudly  receive  their  graduation 
is  perfect.  The  European  grades,  verbal  descriptions, 
certificates.  Not  unlike  many  successful  graduates  in  our 
correspond  roughly  to  every  ten  of  the  American  grades. 
long  history,  your  children  will  go  out  into  the  world, 
Coins reflect both a country’s history and its aspirations, 
and  successfully  participate  in  the  fields  of  politics, 
and  it  is  natural  that  collections  based  on  place  of  origin 
economics, culture, and education. The graduation ceremony 
should  develop.  Thus,  the  European  grade  ‘good’ 
will  be  held  next  Friday  in  Hutt  High  School’s  Assembly 
corresponds  to  20  of  the  American  system,  ‘fine’  to  30, 
Hall.  On  behalf  of  the  school,  I  would  like  to  extend  our 
‘very  fine’  to  40,  ‘extremely  fine’  to  50,  and  ‘almost 
invitation  to  you  and  your  family.  I  look  forward  to 
perfect’ to 60.  Until recently, numerical grading has been 
meeting you there.
applied  only  to  American  coins,  but  the  intention  is  that 
eventually  these  numbers  will  be  used  for  all  types  of 
coins from all over the world.     
*numerical: 
(A), (B), (C)
The  first  thing  I  notice  upon  entering  this  garden  is  that 
A clean sheet of paper is lying in front of you, and you 
the ankle-high grass is greener than (A) that/those  on the 
have to fill it up. Suddenly, your mind may seem as blank 
other side of the fence. Dozens of wildflowers of countless 
as the paper. What can you do to set your pen in motion? 
varieties  cover  the  ground  to  (B) both/either   sides  of  the 
The answer is simple: Don’t be caught in the   
path. Creeping plants cover the polished silver gate and the 
trap.  That  is,  if  you  can  convince  yourself  that  the  first 
sound  of  bubbling  water  comes  from  somewhere.  The 
draft  isn’t  your  best  writing  and  can  be  made  more 
perfume  of  wildflowers  (C) fill/fills  the  air  as  the  grass 
effective  with  additional  thought  and  some  revision,  then  it 
dances  upon  a  gentle  breeze.  A  large  basket  of  herbs  rests  will  be  easier  to  get  started.  When  starting,  don’t  worry 
against  the  fence  to  the  west.  Every  time  I  walk  in  this 
about  what  the  reader  will  think  about  what  you  have 
garden,  I  think,  “Now  I  know  what  it  is  like  to  live  in 
written.  Make  writing  as  easy  for  you  as  you  can  by  not 
paradise.”
being  concerned  with  how  good  the  first  draft  is.  There 
(A) (B) (C) will be time for revising and polishing  any  ideas  you  want 
that both fill to pursue later.
that both fills
perfection copyright relativism
that either fills
destruction imitation
those either fill
those either fills
When  people  began  to  bind  books  with  pages  that  could 
be  turned  rather  than  unrolled  like  papyrus,  the  process  of 
In  general,  one’s  memories  of  any  period  necessarily  __________________  changed.  Now  the  reader  could  easily 
weaken  as  one  moves  away  from  it.  One  is  constantly  move  backward  in  the  text  to  find  a  previously  read 
learning  new  facts,  and  old  ones  have  to  drop  out  to  passage or browse between widely separated sections of the 
make  way  for  them.  At  twenty,  I  could  have  written  same  work.  With  one  technological  change,  cross-referencing 
the  history  of  my  school  days  with  an  accuracy  which  became  possible,  while  the  physical  space  needed  to  house 
would  be  quite  impossible  now.  But  it  can  also  happen  a  collection  of  books  was  sharply  reduced.  Page  numbers 
that  one’s  memories  grow  much  sharper  even  after  a 
became  a  possibility,  as  did  indexes;  tables  of  contents 
long  passage  of  time.  This  is  because  one  is  looking 
became workable references. 
at  the  past  with  fresh  eyes  and  can  isolate  and,  as  it 
*papyrus:
were, notice facts which previously existed undifferentiated 
abusing technology locating information
among  a  mass  of  others.  There  are  things  what  in  a 
sense  I  remembered,  but  which  did  not  strike  me  as  eliminating documents spelling words
strange or interesting until quite recently. creating charactersWhat  is  the  most  prevalent  and  perhaps  most  important  (A) (B) (C)
prefix of our times? The answer should be multi, which means  instinctive appreciating covers
‘more  than  one.’  Our  modern  jobs  are  increasingly  requiring  instinctive confusing removes
multi-tasking.  Our  communities  are  getting  multi-cultural.  Our  instinctive appreciating removes
entertainment is multi-media. While detailed  knowledge  of  a 
inactive appreciating covers
single  area  once  guaranteed  success,  today  the  top  rewards 
inactive confusing removes
go  to  those  who  can  operate  with  equal  confidence  in 
different realms. Let us call these people boundary crossers. 
They  develop  expertise  in  multiple  areas,  they  speak 
different  languages,  and  they  ___________________.  They 
live  multi-lives  because  that  is  more  interesting  and, 
nowadays, more effective. *prefix:
consider bilingual speech communities inefficient
are satisfied with their specialty in a single area
find joy in the rich variety of human experience
avoid areas that require varied expertise
seek comfort in doing the same task
Night diving is obviously less simple than diving during 
the  day,  but  when  properly  organized,  it  is  relatively  Object  identification  rarely  occurs  in  isolation.  Face 
straightforward. A powerful flashlight will easily light your  perception  seems  to  work  the  same  way.  Notice  that 
way  and  the  creatures  around  you,  revealing  marine  life  in 
when  seen  as  part  of  a  face  presented  in  Figure  A, 
its  true  colors.  However,  if  you  cover  up  your  flashlight, 
any  bump  or  line  will  be  sufficient  to  depict  a  feature. 
you  will  ____________________.  Many  creatures  use 
However,  the  result  may  be  different  when  the  features 
phosphorescence  at  night,  and  as  you  move  through  the 
are  separated  from  the  context  as  shown  in  Figure  B. 
water,  you  will  cause  plankton  to  release  tiny  pulses  of 
The  features  in  Figure  B  are  basically  identical  with 
light,  leaving  beautiful  glowing  wakes  trailing  behind  you.
those  in  Figure  A,  but,  out  of  context,  they  are  less 
*phosphorescence:
identifiable.  As  in  Figure  C,  we  actually  require  a  more 
be surprised at how much light there is underwater
simplified  presentation  than  in  Figure  B,  to  identify 
acknowledge the high cost of night diving 
facial  features  unambiguously  when  presented  in  isolation. 
find out how dangerous underwater light is
Thus,  our  understanding  of  context  compensates  for 
realize how good night diving is for your health lack of detail in the feature identification process.
still be unable to see the underwater creatures at all
(A),  (B),  (C)
A  boy  entered  a  coffee  shop  where  I  worked  as  a 
waitress. He sat at a table and asked me how much an ice 
There  are  few  people  who  do  not  react  to  music  to  cream  sundae  was.  “Fifty  cents,”  I  replied.  The  little  boy 
some  degree.  The  power  of  music  is  diverse  and  pulled his hand out of his pocket and studied a number of 
people  respond  in  different  ways.  To  some  it  is  mainly  coins  in  it.  “How  much  is  a  dish  of  plain  ice  cream?”  he 
an (A) instinctive/inactive , exciting sound to which they  inquired. Some people were now waiting for a table, and I 
was impatient. “Thirty-five cents,” I said angrily. The little 
dance  or  move  their  bodies.  Other  people  listen  for  its 
boy  again  counted  the  coins  and  he  ordered  the  plain  ice 
message,  or  take  an  intellectual  approach  to  its  form  and 
cream. I brought the ice cream and walked away. The boy 
construction,  (B) appreciating/confusing  its  formal  patterns 
finished,  paid  the  cashier,  and  departed.  When  I  came 
or  originality.  Above  all,  however,  there  can  be  hardly 
back,  I  swallowed  hard  at  what  I  saw.  There,  placed 
anyone  who  is  not  moved  by  some  kind  of  music.  Music 
neatly  beside  the  empty  dish,  were  fifteen  pennies
(C) covers/removes  the  whole  range  of  emotions:  It  can 
my tip.             *sundae:  , 
make  us  feel  happy  or  sad,  helpless  or  energetic,  and 
relieved  irritated calm  envious
some  music  is  capable  of  overtaking  the  mind  until  it 
sympathetic  terrified frightened  indifferent
forgets  all  else.  It  works  on  the  subconscious,  creating  or 
enhancing mood and unlocking deep memories.   annoyed  embarrassed(A), (B) ways of growing flowers 
One  key  social  competence  is  how  well  or  poorly  curing high blood pressure
people  express  their  own  feelings.  Paul  Ekman  uses  the  healing effect of gardening
term  ‘display  rules’  for  the  social  agreement  about  which  conditions for nursing homes
feelings  can  be  properly  shown  when.  Cultures  sometimes  trends in constructing hospitals
vary  tremendously  in  this  regard.  (A) ,  Ekman 
and  his  colleagues  in  an  Asian  country  studied  the  facial 
reactions  of  students  to  a  horrific  film  about  a  teenage 
Aboriginal  ritual  ceremony.  When  the  students  watched 
Most  of  us  buy  our  food  from  supermarkets.  In  fact, 
the  film  with  an  authority  figure  present,  their  faces 
many  of  us  don’t  even  get  as  far  as  the  supermarket  but 
showed  only  the  slightest  hints  of  reaction.  (B) , 
make  our  choices  at  the  click  of  a  mouse.  We  have 
when  they  thought  they  were  alone  (though  they  were 
abandoned our relationship with the food we eat and with 
being  taped  by  a  secret  camera)  their  faces  twisted  into 
the  people  who  produce  our  food.  Is  it  any  wonder  that 
vivid mixes of uncomfortable feelings.
our  children  don’t  know  where  food  comes  from?  Is  it 
(A) (B)
any  wonder  that  we’re  tired,  overweight,  irritable,  and 
Similarly However
low?  It  is  important  to  be  mindful  about  every  single 
For example Consequently
aspect  of  purchasing  food.  Try  not  to  race  through  your 
Similarly Therefore
For example However shopping.  In  my  hometown,  nobody  would  buy  a  melon 
In addition Consequently without  feeling  it  and  smelling  it;  and  nobody  would 
dream  of  buying  a  chicken  without  knowing  which  farm 
it came from and what it ate. 
We  have  to  ask  ourselves  a  question.  What  kind  of 
world  will  our  children  have  to  live  in?  Will  they  have 
air  to  breathe  and  food  to  eat?  These  are  among  the 
basic  questions  that  were  addressed  at  the  first  world 
meeting  on  the  environment,  attended  by  more  than  100 
world leaders and 30,000 other scientists, newspeople, and 
citizens concerned. These complex problems can no longer 
be  solved  by  individual  countries.  Nations  of  the  world 
must  act  together  if  we  are  to  develop  answers  that  will 
give  a  safe  and  healthy  world  to  our  children.  World 
leaders should have the vision to protect our environment.
The  above  chart  shows  the  top  five  preferred  factors 
There  is  healing  power  in  flowers and  in  trees,  fresh 
for  male  and  female  job  seekers  aged  55  to  79  in  2006. 
air,  and  sweet-smelling  soil.  Just  walking  through  a 
‘Payment’ is the most preferred factor for both male and 
garden  or,  for  that  matter,  seeing  one  out  your  window, 
female  job  seekers  in  this  age  group.  As  for  men, 
can  lower  blood  pressure,  reduce  stress,  and  ease  pain. 
‘sustainability’  is  the  second  most  favored  factor  in 
Get out there and start digging, and the benefits multiply. 
choosing  a  job.  As  for  women,  ‘workload  and  time’  is 
While  it  may  be  basic  and  even  old-fashioned,  using 
preferred  to  ‘sustainability’  in  their  job  seeking.  The 
gardening  as  a  health  care  tool  is  blossoming.  New  or 
remodeled  hospitals  and  nursing  homes  increasingly  come  percentage  of  women  who  tend  to  choose  a  job  based  on 
equipped  with  healing  gardens  where  patients  and  staff  ‘past experience’ is higher than that of men.  ‘Commuting’ 
can  get  away  from  barren,  indoor  surroundings.  Many  is  the  least  considered  factor  for  both  among  the  top  five, 
also  offer  patients  a  chance  to  get  their  hands  dirty  and  but  still  it  is  a  more  favored  factor  for  women  than  for 
their minds engaged in caring for plants. men.Located  1,100  feet  above  the  tiny  coastal  town  of 
Amalfi,  Ravello  has  been  described  as  closer  to  heaven 
than  to  the  sea.  Two  irresistibly  romantic  gardens the 
Villa  Rufolo  and  the  Villa  Cimbrone justify  its  reputation 
as  ‘the  place  where  poets  go  to  die.’  Hotel  guests  can 
hope  to  experience  breathtaking  views  of  the  deep  blue 
sea  from  Palazzo  Sasso.  Constructed  in  the  12th  century, 
now  a  deluxe  hotel,  Palazzo  Sasso  is  all  about  the  view. 
Richard  Wagner  found  inspiration  on  this  site  in  1880, 
penning  a  part  of  Parsifal  during  a  stay  here.  Every 
summer  an  internationally  famous  classical  Wagner  music  The  ability  to  sympathize  with  others  reflects  the 
festival takes place in the garden of the Villa Rufolo. 
multiple  nature  of  the  human  being,  his  potentialities  for 
Amalfi many  more  selves  and  kinds  of  experience  than  any  one 
Ravello being  could  express.  This  may  be  one  of  the  things  that 
Palazzo Sasso enable  us  to  seek  through  literature  an  enlargement  of  our 
Palazzo Sasso 1880
experience.  Although  we  may  see  some  characters  as 
Villa Rufolo Wagner
outside  ourselves that  is,  we  may  not  identify  with  them 
completely we  are  nevertheless  able  to  enter  into  their 
Recreational  tree  climbing behavior  and  their  emotions.  Thus,  the  youth  may  identify 
with  the  aged,  one  gender  with  the  other,  and  a  reader  of 
a  particular  limited  social  background  with  members  of  a 
Recreational  tree  climbing  is  an  evolving  sport.  It  got 
its  start  in  1983,  when  Peter  Jenkins  began  teaching  all  different class or a different period.
sorts  of  people,  including  children,  how  to  climb  trees 
safely  using  a  rope  and  a  harness  and  the  recreational 
tree  climbing  technique.  In  the  United  States,  it  is  now 
practiced  by  a  thousand  or  so  people  but  is  rapidly 
growing  in  popularity.  However,  those  who  study  rare 
plants  are  worried  about  recreational  tree  climbers.  They 
fear  that  these  climbers  may  try  to  climb  the  biggest  and 
tallest  trees  if  they  learn  their  exact  locations.  Any 
contact  between  humans  and  rare  plants  can  be  disastrous 
for the plants. 
Peter Jenkins 1983
However,  when  you  try  to  tickle  yourself,  you  are  in 
complete control of the situation. 
A  status  symbol  is  something,  usually  an  expensive  or 
Why is it that if you tickle yourself, it doesn’t tickle, 
rare object, that indicates a high social status for its owner. 
What  is  considered  a  status  symbol  will  differ  among  but  if  someone  else  tickles  you,  you  cannot  stand  it?
countries,  based  on  the  states  of  their  economic  and  (        )If  someone  was  tickling  you  and  you  managed 
technological development, and common status symbols will  to remain relaxed, it would not affect you at all. (     ) 
change  over  time.  Status  symbols  can  indicate  the  cultural 
Of  course,  it  would  be  difficult  to  stay  relaxed,  because 
values of a society. Let’s take some examples. In a society 
tickling causes tension for most of us, such as feelings of 
that  cherishes  honor  or  bravery,  a  battle  wound  would  be 
unease.  (        )The  tension  is  due  to  physical  contact, 
more  of  a  status  symbol.  In  a  commercial  society,  where 
the  lack  of  control,  and  the  fear  of  whether  it  will  tickle 
having  money  or  wealth  is  most  important,  things  that  can 
or  hurt.  (        )There  is  no  need  to  get  tense  and 
be  brought  by  wealth,  such  as  cars,  houses,  or  fine 
therefore,  no  reaction.  (        )You  will  notice  the  same 
clothing,  are  considered  status  symbols.  And  in  a  society 
where  people  craze  for  beauty,  the  condition  of  one’s  skin  effect if you close your eyes, breathe calmly, and manage 
and body can be a status symbol. to relax the next time someone tickles you. Newton  was  the  first  to  point  out  that  light  is 
One of the toughest parts of isolation is a lack of an 
colorless,  and  that  consequently  color  has  to  occur  inside 
expressive exit. With anger, you can get mad at someone 
our  brains.  He  wrote,  “The  waves  themselves  are  not 
and  yell.  With  sadness,  you  can  cry.  But  isolation  feels 
colored.” Since his time, we have learned that light waves 
like being in a room with no way out.
are  characterized  by  different  frequencies  of  vibration. 
When  they  enter  the  eye  of  an  observer,  they  set  off  a 
(A)For people who cannot push themselves, however, support 
chain  of  neurochemical  events,  the  end  product  of  which 
groups  are  a  good  cure  for  isolation.  They  offer  the 
is  an  internal  mental  image  that  we  call  color.  The 
opportunity for connection in a safe and controlled way. 
essential  point  here  is:  What  we  perceive  as  color  is  not 
made  up  of  color.  Although  an  apple  may  appear  red,  its 
(B)And  the  longer  you  get  stuck  there,  the  harder  it 
atoms are not themselves red.
becomes  to  share  the  pain  and  sorrow.  In  isolation, 
*neurochemical:
hope  disappears,  despair  rules,  and  you  can  no  longer 
Differences in Color Names Frequencies of Vibration see a life beyond the invisible walls that imprison you.
Light Waves of an Object Atoms of an Apple
(C)Some  people  find  it  helpful  to  work  gently  at  driving 
Perception of Color
themselves  back  into  the  world.  In  one  case,  a 
woman  reported  that  after  four  miserable  forced 
If  we  want  to  describe  our  society  in  terms  of  age,  we 
lunches  with  friends,  she  suddenly  enjoyed  the  fifth 
may come up with four age groups childhood, adolescence, 
one as she found herself laughing at a joke. 
maturity,  and  old  age.  We  take  it  for  granted  that  people 
 (A) (B) (C)  (A) (C) (B)  (B) (C) (A)
of  different  ages  behave  differently.  For  example,  we  feel 
 (C) (A) (B)    (C) (B) (A)
that  a  man  in  his  thirties  should  act  his  age  and  not 
behave  like  an  adolescent  or  an  old  man.  Equally,  we 
expect  that,  as  they  go  through  life,  people  of  the  same  (A)
age  will  in  some  ways  understand  each  other  better  than 
(B)
people  of  different  ages.  All  this  is  part  of  expected  ways 
of  behaving  in  our  social  life,  but  it  is  not  something  that  With the rise of the social sciences, and especially the 
we  can  apply  in  formal  institutions  governed  by  anthropology  of  the  1930s  and  thereafter,  words  like 
hard-and-fast rules. ‘savage’  and  ‘primitive’  began  to  disappear  from  the 
vocabulary of cultural studies, along with the notion that 
Age Groups: Their Expected Behavior
the people who had once borne these labels represented 
Secrets of Aging: Myth and Truth 
a  biologically  less  evolved  form  of  humanity.  Medical 
Formal Institutions: Their Social Roles
science  could  find  no  difference  in  the  brains  of  the 
Teens’ Behavior: Respected or Neglected?
former primitives to account for their different behavior; 
Generation Gap: Past, Present, and Future
colonists  necessarily  observed  that  yesterday’s  ‘savage’ 
might  be  today’s  shopkeeper,  soldier,  or  servant.  As 
humanity began to look more like a family of potential 
equals,  Westerners  had  to  accept  that  the  behavior 
I  knocked  at  the  door  and  was  told  to  enter.  I  found 
found in native cultures was not the distinctive feature 
myself  in  a  large  room,  where  the  curtains  were  closed 
of  savage  ‘otherness’  but  the  expression  of  a  capacity 
to  allow  no  daylight  in,  and  the  candles  were  lit.  In  the 
that may exist, for better or for worse, in all of us.   
center  of  the  room,  sitting  at  a  table,  was  the  strangest 
*savage: 
lady  I  had  ever  seen.  She  was  wearing  a  wedding  dress 
made  of  rich  material.  She  had  a  bride’s  flowers  in  her 
hair,  but  her  hair  was  white.  She  only  had  one  white  Westerners  came  to  admit  that  their  view  toward  the 
shoe  on.  Then  I  realized  that  over  the  years  the  flowers  (A)  behavior found in native cultures was   (B) .
in  her  hair  had  died,  and  the  bride  inside  the  dress  had 
grown old. Everything in the room was ancient. The only  (A) (B)
brightness  in  the  room  was  in  her  dark  old  eyes  that  religious righteous
stared at me. distinctive acceptable
different righteous
exciting and festive busy and frustrating
mysterious and scary friendly and funny religious acceptable
peaceful and boring distinctive biased (A) “There  is  a  good  reason  to  make  this  trip  to  the  Person A In  ordinary  life,  you  can  be  very  comfortable 
Island  of  Paradise,”  Captain  Koppe  told  himself  as  he  with modern technology. Just as people search for books in 
stepped  out  of  the  elevator  car  into  the  covered  rooftop  bookstores, you can find and select what you want with a 
hangar of his house. The journey itself would be of use.  computer.  You  have  already  seen  how  much  modern 
There  were  times  when  it  was  important  to  be  alone,  to  technology  has  changed  the  world.  You  can  talk  to  each 
have  time  to  think.  Alone  even  from  one’s  personal  other  in  real  time,  looking  at  each  other  on  a  palm-sized 
robot, from one’s trusted wife. phone.  In  the  near  future,  I  believe  that  most  people  will 
wear  user-friendly  computer  equipment  making  their  daily 
(B) The  outer  doors  opened,  and  the  aircar  slowly 
lives even more convenient. This would give us the chance 
eased  out  into  the  driving  rain.  Suddenly,  (a)it  was  in 
to  find  information  quickly  and  communicate  with  others 
the  middle  of  the  storm,  jumping  and  swinging  in  the 
no matter where we are or what we are doing.
darkness,  the  rain  crashing  down  on  the  windows  with 
incredible violence. The storm boomed and roared outside 
the  long-range  aircar  as  (b)it  fought  for  altitude,  the  Person B The  latest  devices  are  fun  to  use  for  many 
banging and clattering getting worse with every moment. tasks like browsing cyber space, but it is important to keep 
your  distance  from  them  as  well.  The  constant  noises  of 
(C) Smooth  sailing  after  the  storm,  the  aircar  arrived 
electronic  devices  like  computers,  mobile  phones,  fax 
at  the  orbit  of  the  Island  of  Paradise.  Captain  Koppe 
machines, stereos, and home appliances will drown out the 
looked  out  at  the  Island  through  the  window.  He  had 
sounds  of  the  birds  singing  in  the  morning,  the  wind 
been  longing  for  (c)it  since  his  childhood.  At  that 
blowing  through  the  trees,  or  a  pencil  drawing  on  rough 
moment,  his  family  picture  posted  on  the  inside  of  the 
paper.  Modern  technology  is  addictive,  so  be  sure  to  plan 
aircar  came  into  his  eyes.  All  of  a  sudden,  he  had  an 
days  away  from  its  electromagnetic  fields.  Go  out  into 
irresistible  urge  to  go  to  see  his  beloved  wife  and  his 
nature  and  leave  your  mobile  phone  behind.  Or  just  turn 
two  sons.  He  turned  his  back  on  the  Island  of  Paradise 
everything off and ________________________. 
and directed (d)it toward the homeland.
(D) Captain  Koppe  sensed  that  this  was  one  of  those 
times  when  he  had  to  be  alone if  for  no  other  reason 
than  to  remind  himself  that  he  would  have  to  make  his  use of modern technology
decision  alone.  And  he  would  have  the  duration  of  the  web-surfing for home appliances    
flight  all  to  himself.  The  thought  appealed  to  him  as  he  increase in technological problems
powered up the aircar and (e)it lifted a half-meter or so 
sharing information in technical ways
off the deck of the hangar.              *hangar: 
buying a new mobile phone   
(A)
Person B
 (B) (C) (D)  (C) (B) (D) acquire computer skills
 (C) (D) (B)  (D) (B) (C)  enjoy the peace and quiet
 (D) (C) (B) learn how to access data
make the most of technology    
get involved in the modern society 
Koppe
Koppe
Koppe
(a) (e)
 (a)  (b)  (c)  (d)  (e)1
2012학년도 대학수학능력시험 문제지
외국어(영어) 영역
제 3 교시
홀수형
7. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 남자에게 부탁한 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
  1번부터 17번까지는 듣고 답하는 문제입니다. 방송을 잘 
고르시오.
듣고 답을 하기 바랍니다. 듣는 내용은 한 번만 방송됩니다.
①  가족 사진 찍어 주기 ②  과학 숙제 도와 주기
③  수업 자료 복사해 주기 ④  생일 선물 골라 주기
1. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 구입할 가방을 고르시오.
⑤  도서관에 책 반납해 주기
① ② ③
8. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 대화하고 있는 장소로 가장 적절한 
                  곳을 고르시오.
①  녹음실 ②  운동장 ③  영화관
④ ⑤
④  주차장 ⑤  진료실
           
9. 대화를 듣고,  두 사람의 관계를 가장 잘 나타낸 것을 고르시오.
①  신문 기자-소설가 ②  서점 직원-고객
2. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 심정으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.  [1점]
③  도서관 사서-학생 ④  택배 기사-경비원
bored curious excited 
①  ②  ③  ⑤  여행사 직원-손님
jealous  worried
④  ⑤ 
3. 다음을  듣고,  남자가  하는  말의  주제로  가장  적절한  것을  10. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 여자를 위해 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 
고르시오.
고르시오.
①  연설문 검토하기 ②  연설문 출력하기
①  환자 간호 요령  ②  퇴원 시 유의 사항
③  포스터 게시하기 ④  포스터 만들기
③  응급 상황 대처 방법 ④  정기 건강 검진의 중요성
⑤  보고서 작성하기
⑤  병원 서비스 개선 계획
4. 대화를 듣고,  남자가 할 일로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
11. 다음 표를 보면서 대화를 듣고,  두 사람이 선택할 정수기 
to buy basketball tickets
① 
모델을 고르시오.
to analyze the test results
② 
to check the gym schedule
③ 
to bring a referee for the game
④ 
①
to prepare snacks and beverages
⑤  ②
③
④
   
5. 대화를 듣고,  여자가 지불할 총 금액을 고르시오.  [3점]
⑤
$36 $40 $45 $50 $55
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
Chicago  Student  Exchange  Program
6. 다음을 듣고,  여자가 하는 말의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것을  12. 다음을 듣고,  에 관한 
고르시오. 내용과 일치하지 않는  것을 고르시오.
6 Chicago
①  철저한 개인 위생 관리를 당부하려고 ①  참가 학생들은  개월 동안  에 머무르게 된다.
9 4
②  유행성 질병 예방 대책을 촉구하려고 ②  수업 시간은 오전  시부터 오후  시까지이다.
③  다양한 감정 표현 방법을 소개하려고 ③  학교에서 교통편은 제공하지만,  점심은 제공하지 않는다. 
④  즐거운 여가 활동의 중요성을 강조하려고 ④  주말에 학생들은 다양한 야외 활동을 즐길 수 있다.
⑤  웃음이 신체에 미치는 영향을 설명하려고 ⑤  학생 선발은 면접을 통해 이루어진다.
1
82 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
13. 다음 그림의 상황에 가장 적절한 대화를 고르시오.  [1점] 18. 다음 글의 목적으로 가장 적절한 것은?
In  this  digital  age,  images  are  essential  units  of 
information,  and  knowing  how  to  use  photography 
effectively  is  more  important  than  ever.  Fortunately, 
enrolling  at  the  Hobbiton  Institute  of  Photography  is  one 
of  the  easiest,  most  cost-effective  ways  to  take  your 
photography  to  the  next  level.  You’ll  be  assigned  a 
personal adviser, have your work evaluated by experienced 
experts,  and  receive  insightful  suggestions  on  how  to 
make  it  better.  You’ll  also  learn  to  think  on  your  feet 
and  develop  the  eye  of  a  photographer.  You  can  pursue 
your  passion  with  us,  and  your  photography  will  never 
be the same.
①             ②             ③             ④             ⑤
①  사진 전문 강사진을 소개하려고
②  사진 전문 교육 기관을 홍보하려고
14. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  ③  디지털 사진 촬영 기법을 설명하려고
적절한 것을 고르시오. ④  사진 분야 취업 정보를 제공하려고
Woman:                                              ⑤  디지털 사진술 활용을 권장하려고
I hope you’ll understand money doesn’t matter.
① 
It doesn’t sound easy, but it must be rewarding. 19. 밑줄 친 부분이 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른  것은?
② 
More and more people enjoy hiking these days. One  day  in  February  2009,  Stephanie  called  Betty, 
③ 
I’m glad I can work with you at the same company. her  best  friend,  who  was  the  only  employee  of  her 
④  ①
⑤  It’s a good idea to have a picnic at the nearby park. business  Best  Wedding.  Once  again,  they  discussed  the 
company’s expenses and dwindling  revenue.  But  this  time, 
15. 대화를 듣고,  여자의 마지막 말에 대한 남자의 응답으로 가장  Stephanie  knew  what  she  had  to  do.  She  gathered  up  her 
courage  and  told  her  friend  and  colleague:  “I  have  to 
적절한 것을 고르시오. ②
Man:                                                 make  this  work.  I  have  to  let  ③you  go.”  Betty  was hurt 
but  wasn’t  particularly  surprised.  In  a  businesslike  fashion, 
I agree with you. Practice makes perfect.
①  the  two  women  began  figuring  out  how  to  disengage. 
You’re right. I’ll go see a doctor right away.
②  Betty  said  she  wanted  to  start  her  own  event-planning 
But it’s the only way you can keep playing the piano.
③ business,  and  Stephanie  agreed  to  let  her  keep  her 
Congratulations! You won first place in the competition! ④
④
existing  clients,  some  photography,  and  documents  and 
I’m delighted you’re fully recovered from your illness.
⑤ 
forms they had developed together.  She also gave Betty 
⑤
two months’ salary as severance pay.
16. 대화를 듣고,  남자의 마지막 말에 대한 여자의 응답으로 가장  *severance: 해직
적절한 것을 고르시오.
Woman:                                             
(A) (B) (C)
20. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 어법에 맞는 표현으로 가장 
Don’t worry. It’s not your fault. 
①  적절한 것은?
Would you teach me how to read Chinese?
②  On  January  10,  1992,  a  ship  (A) traveled/traveling
I’m very pleased to get this present from you.
③  through  rough  seas  lost  12  cargo  containers,  one  of 
I’ll go with you when I backpack to China next time.
④ 
which  held  28,800  floating  bath  toys.  Brightly  colored 
Okay. I’ll try, but don’t blame me if I can’t figure it out.
⑤ 
ducks,  frogs,  and  turtles  were  set  adrift  in  the  middle  of 
the  Pacific  Ocean.  After  seven  months,  the  first  toys 
Jessica
17. 다음 상황 설명을 듣고,  가 선생님에게 할 말로 가장  made  landfall  on  beaches  near  Sitka,  Alaska,  3,540 
적절한 것을 고르시오.  kilometers  from  (B) what/where  they  were  lost.  Other 
Jessica:                                               toys  floated  north  and  west  along  the  Alaskan  coast  and 
I think Tom needs some medical help.  across  the  Bering  Sea.  Some  toy  animals  stayed  at  sea 
① 
I’m sorry, but I have to go to the hospital. (C) even/very  longer.  They  floated  completely  along  the 
② 
May I go to the bathroom, please? North Pacific currents, ending up back in Sitka.
③ 
My condition couldn’t be better.
④    (A)  (B) (C)
What’s going to be on the exam tomorrow?
⑤  traveled what even
① …… ……
traveled what very
②  …… ……
traveling what even
③  …… ……
  이제 듣기․말하기 문제가 끝났습니다. 18번부터는 문제지
traveling where even
④ …… ……
의 지시에 따라 답을 하기 바랍니다. traveling where very
⑤ …… ……
2
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 33
21. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  어법상 틀린  것은? 24. 다음 글에서 필자가 주장하는 바로 가장 적절한 것은?
Researchers  studied  two  mobile  phone  companies  trying  Many  people  use  their  cleverness  to  justify  and  excuse 
to solve a technological problem. One company developed  themselves  for  the  messiness  of  their  workspaces.  They 
what it called a ‘technology shelf,’ created by a small group  say  things  like,  “I  know  where  everything  is.”  Or  they 
of  engineers,  on  which  was  placed  possible  technical  say  non-humorous  things  such  as,  “A  clean  desk  is  a 
①
solutions  that  other  teams  might  use  in  the  future.  It  also  sign  of  a  sick  mind.”  However,  people  who  say  they 
created  an  open-ended  conversation  among  its  engineers  know  where  everything  is  turn  out  to  be  using  a  large 
②
in  which  salespeople  and  designers  were  often  included.  amount  of  their  mental  capacity  and  creative  energies 
The  boundaries  among  business  units  were  deliberately  remembering  where  they  placed  things,  rather  than  doing 
the  job.  If  they  worked  in  a  well-organized  environment 
ambiguous  because  more  than  technical  information  was 
for  any  length  of  time,  they  would  be  surprised  at  how 
needed  to  get  a  feeling  for  the  problem.  However,  the 
③
much  more  productive  they  were.  If  you  have  a  tendency 
other  company  proceeded  with  more  seeming  clarity  and 
to attempt to explain a messy desk or work area, challenge 
discipline,  dividing  the  problem  into  its  parts.  Different 
④
yourself  to  work  with  a  clean  desk  for  an  entire  day. 
departments  protected  their  territory.  Individuals  and  teams, 
The result will amaze you.
competing  with  each  other,  stopped  sharing  information. 
The two companies did eventually ⑤solve the technological  ①  직원들의 사기 진작을 위해 유머 감각을 잃지 마라.
problem,  but  the  latter  company  had  more  difficulty  than  ②  새로운 근무 환경에 빨리 적응하기 위해 노력하라.
the former. ③  지적 능력을 향상시키기 위해 창의성을 개발하라.
④  업무 편의를 위해 필요한 도구를 가까이 두어라. 
⑤  생산성을 높이기 위해 주변 환경을 정돈하라.
22. 다음 글에서 전체 흐름과 관계 없는  문장은?
During  the  1997  Kyoto  negotiations,  Brazil  made  a  [25～30] 다음 빈칸에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
suggestion  that  has  since  become  known  as  the  Brazilian 
25. What you do in the 15 to 30 minutes after eating your 
Proposal.  Its  idea  was  that  countries  should  now  share 
① evening  meal  sends  powerful  signals  to  your  metabolism. 
the burden of emissions cuts according to how historically 
You’ll set the stage for more vigor throughout the evening 
responsible  they  were  for  the  problem.  In  other  words, 
② hours along with a weight-loss benefit if you stay   
we  should  calculate  what  concentration  of  greenhouse 
after  your  meal.  Among  many  possible  activities,  walking 
gases each country has put into the atmosphere over time 
is one of the easiest ways to get some minutes of exercise 
and  use  those  figures  to  allocate  emissions  cuts.  That 
③ after  a  meal.  In  fact,  research  shows  that  if  you  walk 
would mean, for instance, that countries such as Germany 
after a meal, you may burn 15 percent more calories than 
and  the  United  Kingdom,  which  have  been  emitting  for  if  you  walk  the  same  time,  distance,  and  intensity  on  an 
longer  than  most  countries,  would  bear  a  larger  share  empty stomach.
than  their  current  emissions  implied.  Greenhouse  gases 
④ active alone full
①    ②    ③ 
have  been  known  to  absorb  heat  and  hold  this  heat  in  the 
satisfied silent
④    ⑤ 
atmosphere,  instead  of  reflecting  it  back  into  space.  It 
⑤
would  also  mean  that  big  emitters  that  had  developed 
their  industries  more  recently,  such  as  Australia,  would  26. Interestingly,  people  are  more  overconfident  when  they 
feel  like  they  have  control  of  the  outcome even  when 
bear less of a share. ―
this is clearly not the case. For example, it is documented 
that  if  people  are  asked  to  bet  on  whether  a  coin  toss  is 
23. 다음 글에 드러난 ‘I’의 심경으로 가장 적절한 것은?  [1점] heads or tails, most bet larger amounts if the coin is yet to 
be tossed. If the coin is tossed and the outcome is concealed, 
It  started  out  like  any  other  day.  I  had  no  idea  that  I 
people will offer lower amounts when asked for bets. People 
was  in  for  one  of  the  most  terrifying  experiences  of  my 
act as if __________________________________________. 
life.  I  headed  to  the  beach  and  jumped  on  my  surfboard 
In this case, control of the outcome is clearly an illusion. 
and  paddled  out.  I  was  about  150  yards  off  the  beach, 
This perception occurs in investing, as well. Even without 
when  I  felt  a  sudden  chill  in  the  air  followed  by  an 
information,  people  believe  the  stocks  they  own  will 
uncomfortable  stillness.  Suddenly,  I  heard  the  lifeguard  perform  better  than  stocks  they  do  not  own.  However, 
scream, “Get out of the water!” There was a certain panic  ownership  of  a  stock  only  gives  the  illusion  of  having 
in his voice that demanded attention. Then I saw something  control of the performance of the stock.
  [3점]   
approaching  me  in  the  water.  It  was  big  and  gray,  and 
the amount of the bet will influence the outcome
①
closing in on me fast. I tried to paddle back to shore but 
their involvement will somehow affect the outcome of the toss
②
my arms and legs were paralyzed.
there is a parallel between a coin toss and stock investments
③
amused ashamed disappointed their illusion will not disappear even after the coin is tossed
①  ②  ③  ④
flattered frightened they can predict the outcome with credible information
④  ⑤  ⑤
3
84 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
27. The  truth  is  that  everyone  has  a  story.  Every  person  30. Often  in  social  scientific  practice,  even  where  evidence 
we  meet  has  a  story  that  can,  in  some  way,  inform  us  is  used,  it  is  not  used  in  the  correct  way  for  adequate 
and help us as we live the story of our own lives. When  scientific  testing.  In  much  of  social  science,  evidence  is 
used  only  to  affirm  a  particular  theory to  search  for 
we  acknowledge  this  truth  and  begin  to  look  at  others  as  ―
________________________________,  we  open  ourselves  the  positive  instances  that  uphold  it.  But  these  are  easy 
to  find  and  lead  to  the  familiar  dilemma  in  the  social 
up  to  new  possibilities  in  our  lives.  In  reality,  the  people 
sciences  where  we  have  two  conflicting  theories,  each  of 
who  are  most  different  from  us  probably  have  the  most 
which can claim positive empirical evidence in its support 
to  teach  us.  The  more  we  surround  ourselves  with  people 
but  which  come  to  opposite  conclusions.  How  should  we 
who  are  the  same  as  we  are,  who  hold  the  same  views, 
decide  between  them?  Here  the  scientific  use  of  evidence 
and who share the same values, the greater the likelihood 
may  help.  For  what  is  distinctive  about  science  is  the 
that we will shrink as human beings rather than grow. 
search  for  negative  instances the  search  for  ways  to 
―
rivals competing against us  falsify a theory, rather than to confirm it. The real power 
① 
of  scientific  testability  is  negative,  not  positive.  Testing 
reliable guidelines for conformity    
② 
allows  us  not  merely  to  confirm  our  theories  but  to      
potential sources of valuable information 
③                                                . 
members of the same interest group [3점]
④ 
attentive listeners of our life stories ignore the evidence against them
⑤  ① 
falsify them by using positive empirical evidence
② 
intensify the argument between conflicting theories
③ 
28. Although  there  are  numerous  explanations  for  the  fall  weed out those that do not fit the evidence
④ 
of the Roman empire, the deeper cause lies in the declining  reject those that lack negative instances
⑤ 
fertility  of  its  soil  and  the  decrease  in  agricultural  yields. 
Italy  was  densely  forested  at  the  beginning  of  Roman 
(A) (B)
rule.  By  the  end  of  the  Roman  Imperium,  however,  Italy  31. 다음 글의 빈칸  ,  에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
had  been  stripped  of  forest  cover.  The  timber  was  sold  The term euphemism derives from a Greek word meaning 
on  the  open  market  and  the  soil  converted  to  crops  and  ‘to  speak  with  good  words’  and  involves  substituting  a 
pastureland.  The  cleared  soil  was  rich  in  minerals  and  more pleasant, less objectionable way of saying something 
nutrients  and  provided  substantial  production  yields.  for  a  blunt  or  more  direct  way.  Why  do  people  use 
Unfortunately,  deforestation  left  the  soil  exposed  to  harsh  euphemisms? They do so probably to help smooth out the 
‘rough  edges’  of  life,  to  make  the  unbearable  bearable 
weather.  Wind  blew  across  the  barren  landscapes  and 
and  the  offensive  inoffensive.  (A) ,  euphemisms 
water  ran  down  from  the  mountaintops  and  slopes,  taking 
can  become  dangerous  when  they  are  used  to  create 
the  soil  with  them.  Overgrazing  of  livestock  resulted  in 
misperceptions of important issues.  (B) , a politician 
further  deterioration  of  the  soil.  Consequently,  Rome’s 
may indicate that one of his statements was ‘somewhat at 
___________________  could  not  provide  sufficient  energy 
variance  with  the  truth,’  meaning  that  he  lied.  Even  more 
to  maintain  its  infrastructure  and  the  welfare  of  its 
serious  examples  include  describing  rotting  slums  as 
citizens.
‘substandard  housing,’  making  the  miserable  conditions 
dense forests appear reasonable and the need for action less important.
① 
climate changes
②  (A) (B)
irrigation system 
③  However For example
① ……
declining population 
④  In short For example
②  ……
agricultural production 
⑤  That is Similarly
③  ……
In addition Therefore
④ ……
Nevertheless Similarly
29. The  identical  claim,  expressed  in  two  social  contexts,  ⑤ ……
may  have  different  qualifiers.  When  talking  among 
friends,  you  might  say,  “Lucé  is  the  world’s  finest  32. 다음 글의 밑줄 친 부분 중,  문맥상 낱말의 쓰임이 적절하지 
restaurant.”  When  speaking  to  a  group  of  French  chefs, 
않은  것은?
you  might  find  yourself  saying,  “Lucé  is  an  excellent 
Until  the  1920’s,  there  were  only  three  competitive 
restaurant,  comparable  to  some  of  the  best  in  France.” 
swimming strokes freestyle, backstroke, and breaststroke  
─ ─
Why  did  you  say  it  differently?  Perhaps  because  you 
and  each  had  specific  rules  that  described  how  it  was  to 
expected  a  different  critical  scrutiny  in  the  two  groups. 
be  performed.  The  rules  of  breaststroke  stated  that 
①
Maybe  because  your                      was  strong  both  arms  must  be  pulled  together  underwater  and  then 
enough  for  friends  but  not  as  strong  among  the  most  recovered  simultaneously  back  to  the  start  of  the  pulling 
knowledgeable.  In  each  instance,  you  communicated  the  position  to  begin  the  next  stroke.  Most  people  interpreted 
extent  to  which  you  wanted  to  qualify  your  claim,  to  this  arm  recovery  to  mean  an  underwater  recovery.  In 
②
guard  yourself  by  restricting  the  extent  to  which  you  are  the  1920’s,  however,  someone  challenged  the  rules  and 
③
willing to be held accountable for the claim.  reinterpreted  this  arm  recovery  to  be  an  out-of-the-water 
recovery.  Since  this  new  breaststroke  was  about  15%
desire to win friendship
①  slower,  people  using  the  conventional  version  couldn’t 
④
confidence in the claim
②  effectively  compete.  Something  had  to  be  done  to  solve 
③  appetite for French cuisine the  problem.  Finally,  this  new  stroke─now  known  as 
support for others’ opinions the ‘butterfly’ won  recognition as the fourth swimming 
④  ─ ⑤
suspicion of popular beliefs  stroke, and became an Olympic event in 1956.
⑤ 
4
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 55
(A) (B) (C) cultural differences in perception and interpretation 
33. ,  ,  의 각 네모 안에서 문맥에 맞는 낱말로 가장  ① 
tragic characteristics of classic West African plays 
② 
적절한 것은?
the positive function of culture as a mirror of reality
Even  those  of  us  who  claim  not  to  be  materialistic  ③ 
human nature and its role in developing culture
can’t  help  but  form  attachments  to  certain  clothes.  Like  ④ 
the process of acquiring cultural knowledge 
fragments  from  old  songs,  clothes  can  (A) evoke/erase ⑤ 
both  cherished  and  painful  memories.  A  worn-thin  dress 
may  hang  in  the  back  of  a  closet  even  though  it  hasn’t  36. 다음 도표의 내용과 일치하지 않는  문장은?
been  worn  in  years  because  the  faint  scent  of  pine  that 
lingers  on  it  is  all  that  remains  of  someone’s  sixteenth 
summer. A(n) (B) impractical/brand-new white scarf might 
be pulled out of a donation bag at the last minute because 
of  the  promise  of  elegance  it  once  held  for  its  owner. 
And  a  ripped  T-shirt  might  be  (C) rescued/forgotten 
from  the  dust  rag  bin  long  after  the  name  of  the  rock 
band  once  written  across  it  has  faded.  Clothes  document 
personal  history  for  us  the  same  way  that  fossils  chart 
time for archaeologists.
(A) (B) (C)
evoke impractical rescued
① …… ……
②  evoke …… impractical …… forgotten The  graphs  above  show  the  percentage  of  world 
③  evoke …… brand-new …… forgotten electricity  generation  by  sources  of  energy  for  1971  and 
erase impractical rescued 2007.  According  to  the  graphs,  the  primary  source  of 
④ …… …… ①
erase brand-new forgotten electricity  generation  in  both  1971  and  2007  was  coal 
⑤ …… ……
and  peat,  accounting  for  over  40%  of  the  total  electricity 
generation.  Oil showed the biggest decrease in electricity 
②
[34～35] 다음 글의 주제로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. generation,  which  fell  from  20.9%  in  1971  to  5.6%  in 
2007.  The  source  that  showed  the  biggest  increase  was 
34. Living  things  naturally  return  to  a  state  of  balance.  ③
nuclear,  which  rose  from  2.1%  in  1971  to  13.8%  in 
When  we  are  disturbed  by  forces  acting  on  us,  our  inner 
2007.  In  1971,  hydro  was  the  second  biggest  source  of 
machinery  kicks  in  and  returns  us  to  a  balanced  state  of  ④
electricity  generation,  but  in  2007,  gas  was  the  second 
equilibrium.  Homeostasis  is  the  word  we  use  to  describe 
biggest,  accounting  for  more  than  20%  of  the  total 
the ability of an organism to maintain internal equilibrium 
electricity  generation.  Besides  coal  and  peat,  hydro  was 
by  adjusting  its  physiological  processes.  Most  of  the  ⑤
the  only  source  that  accounted  for  more  than  20%  of  the 
systems  in  animal  and  human  physiology  are  controlled 
total electricity generation in both 1971 and 2007.
by homeostasis. We don’t like to be off balance. We tend 
to  keep  things  in a  stable  condition.  This  system  operates 
1920 Everest
at  all  levels.  Our  blood  stays  the  same  temperature.  37. 년대    등반에 관한 다음 글의 내용과 일치하는 
Except  for  extraordinary  exceptions,  when  people  find 
것은?
ways  to  intervene  using  methods  more  powerful  than  our 
Marking  the  Nepal-Tibet  border,  Everest  looms  as  a 
tendency  to  equilibrium,  our  habits,  behaviors,  thoughts, 
three-sided  pyramid  of  gleaming  ice  and  dark  rock.  The 
and our quality of life stay pretty much the same too. 
first eight expeditions to Everest were British, all of which 
physical balance needed for mental equilibrium attempted the mountain from the northern, Tibetan, side
①  ― 
inner mechanisms to enhance the quality of life not because it presented the most obvious weakness in the 
② 
general tendency of organisms to keep equilibrium peak’s  formidable  defenses  but  because  in  1921  the 
③ 
major differences in animal and human physiology Tibetan government opened its borders to foreigners, while 
④ 
biological processes resulting from habitual behaviors Nepal remained off limits. The first Everesters were obliged 
⑤ 
to trek 400 miles from Darjeeling across the Tibetan plateau 
to reach the foot of the mountain. Their knowledge of the 
35. All  of  us  use  the  cultural  knowledge  we  acquire  as 
deadly  effects  of  extreme  altitude  was  limited  and  their 
members  of  our  own  society  to  organize  our  perception 
equipment  was  poor.  Yet  in  1924,  a  member  of  the  third 
and  behavior.  Most  of  us  are  also  naive  realists:  we  tend 
British expedition, Edward Felix Norton, reached an elevation 
to  believe  our  culture  mirrors  a  reality  shared  by 
of 28,126 feet just 900 feet below the summit before 
everyone.  But  cultures  are  different,  and  other  people  ― ―
being defeated by exhaustion and snow blindness. It was an 
rarely  behave  or  interpret  experience  according  to  our 
astounding achievement that was not surpassed for 28 years.
cultural  plan.  For  example,  an  American  anthropologist 
attempted to tell the classic story of Hamlet to Tiv elders  Nepal
① 처음 여덟 팀의 등반대는    쪽에서 등반을 시작했다.
in  West  Africa.  She  believed  that  human  nature  is  pretty  Tibet
② 최초의 등반대는    고원 지대를 우회하여 산기슭에 도달
much the same the whole world over; at least the general 
했다.
plot and motivation of the great tragedy would always be 
③ 최초의 등반대는 극한 고도의 치명적 영향에 관한 지식이 
clear.  But,  at  each  turn  in  the story when she told it, the 
충분했다.
Tiv  interpreted  the  events  and  motives  in  Hamlet  using  1924 Edward  Felix  Norton 900
④ 년에  이 정상의  피트 아래 
their  own  cultural  knowledge.  The  result  was  a  very 
지점까지 올랐다. 
different version of the classic play. Edward Felix Norton
⑤ 의 등반 기록은 이듬해에 경신되었다.
5
86 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
38. Giorgio  Vasari에  관한  다음  글의  내용과  일치하지  않는  40. Standard  English  allows  access  to  certain  educational 
and  economic  opportunities,  which  is  the  primary  reason 
것은?
for  teaching  it.  Students  realize  this  when  they  interview 
Giorgio  Vasari,  the  Italian  painter,  architect,  and  writer, 
for  a  first  job  or  when  they  plan  for  post-high  school 
was born in Arezzo in 1511. He was considered to be more 
education. So, what should teachers do when a student says, 
successful  as  an  architect  than  a  painter.  But  what  made 
“I  ain’t  got  no  pencil,”  or  brings  some  other  nonstandard 
him truly famous was his book Lives of the Most Eminent 
dialect  into  the  classroom?  Opinions  vary  from  ‘rejection 
Painters, Sculptors and Architects (shortened as Lives). It is 
and  correction’  to  complete  acceptance.  The  approach 
not known exactly how many copies of the first edition of 
most  consistent  with  culturally  responsive  teaching  is  to 
Lives, published in 1550, were printed, but it earned Vasari 
first  accept  the  dialect  and  then  build  on  it.  For  example, 
the praise of his peers. Then in a revised edition of Lives 
when the student says, “I ain’t got no pencil,” the teacher 
in 1568, complete with portraits of the artists, he combined 
might say, “Oh, you don’t have a pencil. What should you 
biographical anecdotes with critical comment. Although the 
do, then?” Although results won’t be apparent immediately, 
revised edition overshadowed Vasari’s own achievements as 
the  long-range  benefits both  for  language  development 
a painter and architect, it made him the most respected man  ―
and attitudes toward school are worthwhile.  
of  the  Italian  art  world.  He  was  even  knighted  by  Pope  ―
Pius  in 1571.
Ⅴ  ①  표준어 사용의 경제적 측면을 고려해야 한다.
Arezzo ②  비표준어 사용을 수용하면서 표준어를 교육해야 한다.
① 에서 태어난 이탈리아 화가, 건축가 겸 작가였다.  
③  단기 효과를 얻을 수 있는 교수 학습법을 개발해야 한다.
Lives
② 의 초판본으로 동료들로부터 칭송을 받았다.  
④ 면접에서 표준어를 사용하도록 취업 교육을 강화해야 한다.
Lives
③ 의 개정판에 예술가들의 전기적 일화와 비평을 함께 실었다.
⑤ 비문법적 표현이 고착되지 않도록 지체 없이 교정해야 한다.
Lives
④ 의 개정판으로 이탈리아 예술계에서 존경을 받지 못하게 
되었다.
1571
⑤ 년에 교황으로부터 기사 작위를 받았다. 
[41～42] 다음 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오.
41. Emotional  eaters  manifest  their  problem  in  lots  of 
different  ways.  For  many  people,  one  of  the  classic  signs 
[39～40] 다음 글의 요지로 가장 적절한 것을 고르시오. of  emotional  eating  is  night  eating.  Night  eaters  are  often 
eating  in  response  to  anxiety  or  to  the  emotional  turmoil 
39. The good news is that it’s never too late to start building 
they’ve  experienced  throughout  the  day.  Boredom  and 
up muscle strength, regardless of your age. Ideally, though, 
loneliness  are  also  more  likely  to  come  to  the  surface 
it’s  best  to  start  in  your  mid-forties  when  muscle  mass 
when  the  rush  of  the  day  is  done  and  the  night  stretches 
starts to decline significantly. “Once you’ve started, it can 
ahead.  Sometimes  emotional  eating  is  a  reaction  to  a 
take  just  six  weeks  to  see  an  improvement  of  up  to  20 
specific  situation.  You  had  a  bad  day  at  work.  The  kids 
percent in your muscle capabilities,” says Dr. Ward. Studies 
have  been  so  demanding  that  you  are  completely  worn 
have  found  that  intense  programs  of  strength  training  can 
out.  You  and  your  significant  other  are  fighting.  It 
help even weak older people double their strength, as well 
doesn’t  matter  what  the  circumstances  are;  the  end  result 
as enable them to walk faster and climb stairs more easily. 
is  that  99  times  out  of  100  you  end  up  on  the  couch 
And muscle isn’t all you gain strength training can help 
―
with  a  bowl  of  chips  or  bag  of  cookies  in  your  hand, 
combat  osteoarthritis,  depression,  and  risk  factors  for  heart 
telling yourself it’s the only way you can relax.
disease and diabetes.
*osteoarthritis: 골관절염 *turmoil: 혼란
Family Life and Eating Behavior 
①  근력 운동의 효과는 단기간에 얻기 힘들다. ① 
Emotional Eating: Signs and Reasons
②  근력 운동에 필요한 기초 체력을 길러야 한다. ② 
40 Emotional Treatments for Night Eaters
③  대 이후에는 성인병 예방에 주의를 기울여야 한다.  ③ 
Relaxation: An Ingredient for Good Diet
④  운동량은 연령에 따라 적절히 조절해야 한다. ④ 
⑤  근력 운동은 나이가 들어서도 건강에 유익하다.  ⑤  What You Eat Is What You Are!
6
8홀수형 외외국국어어((영영어어))  영영역역 77
42. Giving  people  the  latitude  and  flexibility  to  use  their  44. 글의 흐름으로 보아,  주어진 문장이 들어가기에 가장 적절
judgment  and  apply  their  talents  rapidly  accelerates  한 곳은?
progress. Send a message of respect and inspire people to 
The  DNA  extracted  from  these  bits  of  whale  skin  not 
be  creative  and  use  their  individual  talents  toward  the 
only  identifies  the  individuals  in  the  group,  but  also 
goals  of  the  enterprise.  Empower  people  by  letting  them 
reveals their relationships to each other. 
know that you believe in them and allowing them to take 
action.  Trusting  people  and  empowering  them  also  allows  Sperm  whales  travel  in  social  groups  that  cooperate  to 
defend  and  protect  each  other,  and  may  even  share 
you to focus on the things you need to accomplish. Ellyn 
suckling  of  calves.  ( )  It  is  difficult  to  determine  the 
McColgan  says,  “I  used  to  say  to  people  all  the  time,  ‘I  ①
membership of these groups from sightings alone, because 
can  help  you  figure  out  just  about  any  problem  you 
of  the  practical  difficulties  of  observing  whale  behavior, 
throw  at  me,  but  is  that  really  what  you  want  from  me?’ 
most  of  which  happens  underwater.  ( )  To  make 
②
They  would  look  at  me  funny  and  say,  ‘Not  really.’  I 
things even more difficult, sperm whales can travel across 
would say, ‘I think what you would like is to do a great 
entire  oceans  and  can  dive  to  a  depth  of  a  kilometer.   
job and then give me an opportunity to say, ‘Great job!’’  ( )  Biologists  who  study  whale  behavior  generally 
③
Then they would respond, ‘Yes, that’s true.’” have  to  be  content  with  hanging  around  in  boats,  waiting 
for  their  subjects  to  surface.  ( )  But  when  they  do 
What Frustrates Employers Most?  ④
① 
surface,  in  addition  to  taking  photos  which  allow 
How to Hire a Competent Employee
②  individual  whales  to  be  identified,  biologists  can  zip  over 
Empowering Employees Through Trust 
③  in  worryingly  small  boats  and  pick  up  the  bits  of  skin 
Talents: An Essential Factor in Life that  the  whales  leave  behind  on  the  surface  when  they 
④ 
Mixed Roles Between Employers and Employees re-submerge.  ( )  This  has  allowed  researchers  to 
⑤  ⑤
describe sperm whale social groups in detail. 
*sperm whale: 향유고래
(A)
45. 다음 글의 내용을 한 문장으로 요약하고자 한다.  빈칸  와 
(B)
에 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
Mediation is a process that has much in common with 
43. 주어진 글 다음에 이어질 글의 순서로 가장 적절한 것은?    advocacy  but  is  also  crucially  different.  It  parallels 
advocacy  in  so  far  as  it  tends  to  involve  a  process  of 
Do you worry about losing your good health? Do you 
negotiation,  but  differs  in  so  far  as  mediation  involves 
fear that crime, war, or terrorist attacks will disrupt the 
adopting  a  neutral  role  between  two  opposing  parties  
economy and your security?  rather  than  taking  up  the  case  of  one  party  against 
another.  At  times,  particularly  in  very  complex 
(A) It’s because television focuses on news that makes the  situations, the processes of advocacy and mediation can 
world seem like a more dangerous place than it actually  overlap,  perhaps  with  very  problematic  results,  as  one 
is. Afraid of the world that is portrayed on TV, people  loses  clarity  over  his  or  her  role.  It  is  therefore 
stay in their homes with close family and do not build  important, if not essential, to maintain a clear focus in 
undertaking  advocacy  or  mediation  in  order  to  ensure 
bonds with their neighbors.
that  the  roles  do  not  become  blurred  and  therefore 
(B) These are legitimate concerns that many people share.  potentially  counterproductive.  For  example,  a  mediator 
We live in difficult and uncertain times. But are these  who  ‘takes  sides’  is  likely  to  lose  all  credibility,  as  is 
fears real? Research shows that people who watch a lot  an advocate who seeks to adopt a neutral position.
󰀻
of news on television overestimate the threats to their 
well-being. Why?
Although  both  deal  with  negotiation,  a  mediator  needs 
(C) Thus they become more vulnerable. Surrounding ourselves 
to  maintain  (A)   and  an  advocate  partiality  in 
with  a  wall  of  fear,  however,  is  not  the  answer.  The  order to  (B)  crossing over into each other’s role. 
only  way  to  overcome  this  problem  is  to  be  more 
(A) (B)
connected to others, and this connection will reduce fear 
neutrality avoid
and isolation.  ① ……
neutrality encourage
②  ……
①  (A)-(C)-(B) ②  (B)-(A)-(C) ③  potentiality …… reinforce
(B) (C) (A) (C) (A) (B)  creativity facilitate
③  - - ④  - - ④ ……
⑤  (C)-(B)-(A) ⑤ creativity …… prevent
7
88 외국어(영어) 영역 홀수형
[46～48] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오. 48. 위 글의 ‘I’에 관한 내용과 일치하지 않는  것은?
2
(A) ①  지역 신문사의 에세이 대회에서  등 상을 탔다.
20
②  심한 병을 앓고 있었을 때  년 전에 산 공책을 발견했다. 
When  I  was  a  freshman  in  high  school,  I  won  second 
③ 병이 나은 지 몇 년 후에 스케이트보딩을 처음으로 시작했다.
prize in our local newspaper’s essay contest on the theme 
④  대학에서 미술을 전공하지는 않았다.   
of  ‘future  career.’  I  wrote  about  wanting  to  become  a 
⑤  전문 화가가 된 후,  결혼을 했고 두 딸을 두었다.   
journalist. We had to collect our prizes at the local variety 
store  and,  while  waiting  in  line,  a  little  notebook  in  the 
stationery  department  caught  my  eye.  (a)It  was  a  black  [49～50] 다음 글을 읽고, 물음에 답하시오.
and  red  hardcover  book  with  the  word  ‘Record’  neatly 
Since  the  beginning  of  time,  the  mysterious  nature  of 
engraved  in  gold  on  the  cover.  I  reasoned  that  since  I 
dreaming  has  led  people  to  believe  that  dreams  were 
was  going  to  be  a  journalist,  I’d  need  a  very  special 
messages from the other world. Dreams have been regarded 
notebook in which to write. So I bought (b)it.
as prophetic communications which, when properly decoded, 
(B) would enable us to foretell the future. There is, however, 
absolutely  no  scientific  evidence  for  this  theory.  It  is 
Then  during  a  serious  illness  when  I  was  thirty-five,  I 
certainly true that individuals who are concerned about a 
found  the  little  notebook  I  had  purchased  twenty  years 
traumatic event, such as the threat of the loss of a loved 
earlier.  From  my  sick  bed  I  noticed  (c)it  on  a  nearby 
one  who  is  sick,  will  dream  about  that  loved  one  more 
shelf.  It  was  still  blank  but  something  told  me  to  write 
than would otherwise be the case. If the dreamer then calls 
my  deepest  feelings  and  thoughts,  my  pain  and  fear,  my 
and finds that the loved one has died, it is understandable 
wishes  and  dreams,  the  words  of  my  inner  world.  This 
for him or her to assume that the dream was a premonition 
was  my  first  ‘official’  journal.  And  the  process  of 
of  that  death.  But  this  is  a mistake. It  is  simply  a(n) 
journal-keeping  through  writing  and  drawing  helped  heal 
  correspondence  between  a  situation  about 
me  from  a  mysterious  illness  which  had  defied  the 
which one has intense concern and the occurrence of the 
doctors and their medicines.
event that one fears.
(C) To prove the existence of premonitory dreams, scientific 
evidence must be obtained. We would need to do studies 
My  life  changed  so  much  after  that.  I  began  listening 
in which individuals are sampled in terms of their dream 
to  my  own  feelings  and  inner  wisdom.  The  insights  I 
life and judges are asked to make correspondences between 
gained through journal-keeping led me into a new career 
these dream events and events that occurred in real life. A 
as an art therapist and teacher of diary writing and drawing. 
problem that arises here is that individuals who believe in 
More importantly, I learned to play and enjoy life again. 
premonitory dreams may give one or two striking examples 
For  instance,  several  years  after  recovering  from  my 
of  ‘hits,’  but  they  never  tell  you  how  many  of  their 
illness,  I  started  skateboarding  for  the  first  time  in  my 
life and loved (d)it. I’m grateful to that high school girl  premonitory dreams ‘missed.’ To do a scientific study of 
that  I  was  for  having  the  sense  to  buy  a  little  blank  dream prophecy, we would need to establish some base of 
book. I used it to save my life and to help others. how  commonly    correspondences  occur  between 
dream  and  waking  reality.  Until  we  have  that  evidence, 
(D) it is better to believe that the assumption is false.
But I put the notebook away and promptly forgot about  *premonitory: 예고의, 전조의
(e)it  and  about  becoming  a  journalist.  Painting  became 
my great love. Upon graduating from high school, I went 
49. 위 글의 제목으로 가장 적절한 것은? 
to  college  as  a  fine  art  major  and  English  minor.  After 
Why Do People Dream? 
becoming  a  professional  artist,  marriage  followed,  then  ① 
Ways to Interpret Dreams
the  birth  of  two  daughters.  A  career  change  came  next  ② 
Origin of Dream Prophecy
which  led  to  teaching  underprivileged  young  children  in  ③ 
Los Angeles. The years passed. ④  Scientific History of Dreams
Can Dreams Foretell the Future?
⑤ 
(A)
46. 위 글  에 이어질 내용을 순서에 맞게 배열한 것으로 가장 
50. 위 글의 빈칸에 공통으로 들어갈 말로 가장 적절한 것은?
적절한 것은?
①  (B)-(D)-(C) ②  (C)-(B)-(D) ①  close ②  coincidental ③  inevitable
logical scientific
(C) (D) (B) (D) (B) (C) ④  ⑤ 
③  - - ④  - -
(D) (C) (B)
⑤  - -
*  확인 사항
(a) (e)
47. 밑줄 친  ～   중에서 가리키는 대상이 나머지 넷과 다른 
◦답안지의 해당란에 필요한 내용을 정확히 기입(표기)했는지 확인
것은?
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)  하시오.
①  ②  ③  ④  ⑤ 
8
8